

--- PAGE 1 ---
20 
CHAPTER 3  
 
 
REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 
3.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the requirement analysis and system design for the proposed 
product authentication system. The purpose of this chapter is to identify the functional and 
non-functional requirements of the system and to explain how the system is design ed to 
fulfill these requirements.  
The system requirements were derived from multiple sources, including the literature 
review discussed in Chapter 2 and an analysis of existing product authentication solutions. 
These requirements are categorized into functional and non -functional requireme nts to 
clearly define the system’s expected behaviour, performance, and constraints.  
In addition, this chapter describes the overall system design, including system 
overview, system architecture, data flow diagram, use case interactions, activity flows, 
sequence diagrams, and user interface structure. The proposed design emphasizes secure 
product verification, effective detection of cloned QR codes, and controlled product 
revocation, while maintaining usability for both manufacturers and consumers. 
3.2 Requirement Analysis 
Requirement analysis is an important phase in system development as it defines what 
the system should do and how it should perform. This section explains how the system 
requirements were gathered and presents both functional and non -functional requirements 
for the proposed system. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
21 
3.2.1 Source of Requirements 
The requirements for this project were obtained through several sources:  
1. Literature Review  
Existing studies on blockchain -based product authentication, QR code 
verification, and counterfeit detection were reviewed in Chapter 2. These studies 
helped identify common system features, limitations, and research gaps, such as 
the absence of clone detection and revocation mechanisms.  
2. Analysis of Existing Systems  
Observations of current QR -based and  centralized authentication systems 
highlighted weaknesses such as QR code duplication, lack of real -time 
monitoring, and absence of product revocation features. These weaknesses 
guided the formulation of system requirements.  
3. Stakeholder-Oriented Requirement Considerations  
System requirements were derived from inferred stakeholder needs based on 
typical product authentication workflows. Manufacturers require the ability to 
register products, monitor scan activities, detect abnormal usage patterns, and 
revoke products when necessary due to recalls or counterfeit detection. 
Consumers require a fast, simple, and trustworthy verification process using a 
mobile device, which influenced the adoption of a mobile-first web interface and 
a minimal-interaction verification workflow. Retail and post-purchase scenarios, 
where legitimate repeated scans may occur, were also considered. These 
considerations informed the verification workflow, scan logging, clone detection 
logic, and user feedback mechanisms. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
22 
3.2.2 Functional Requirements 
Functional requirements define the core functions that the system must perform. The 
functional requirements for the proposed system are as follows:  
1. The system shall allow manufacturers to register products into the system.  
2. The system shall generate a unique QR code for each registered product.  
3. The system shall store product information in a blockchain-based ledger.  
4. The system shall allow consumers to verify product authenticity by scanning a QR 
code.  
5. The system shall record each QR code scan for monitoring purposes.  
6. The system shall detect possible cloned QR codes based on repeated or abnormal 
scan activity.  
7. The system shall allow manufacturers to revoke products that are fake, recalled, or 
compromised.  
8. The system shall display verificatio n results to consumers, including authenticity 
status and revocation warnings. 
3.2.3 Non-Functional Requirements 
Non-functional requirements describe the quality attributes and performance 
expectations of the system.  
 Performance  
The system shall return verification results within 2 -3 seconds after a QR 
code scan under normal operating conditions.  
 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
23 
 Security  
Product authentication data shall be protected from unauthorized 
modification using tamper -resistant properties inspired by  blockchain 
principles, ensuring the integrity of stored records.  
 Usability  
The system interface shall provide a mobile-first web interface that is simple 
and intuitive for both manufacturers and consumers.  
 Reliability  
The system shall operate consiste ntly during repeated QR code scans and 
verification request, with basic error handling to ensure continued operation 
when invalid or revoked products are scanned. 
 Maintainability  
The system shall be designed using modular architecture, separating core 
components to facilitate future updates and feature enhancements. 
3.3 System Design 
This section describes the design of the proposed QR code -based product 
authentication system. The system is designed to meet the identified requirements and 
support secure product verification. It explains how the main components of the system work 
together to enable QR code scanning, authenticity checking, clone detection, and product 
revocation using blockchain technology. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
24 
3.3.1 System Overview 
This section provides an overview of the proposed product authentication system and 
explains how the main components interact to achieve secure product verification. The 
system is designed to help manufacturers and consumers verify product authenticity using 
QR codes combined with blockchain technology.  
The system involves two main user roles, manufacturers and consumers. 
Manufacturers are responsible for registering products into the system, generating unique 
QR codes, and managing product status, including revoking products that are recalled o r 
identified as counterfeit. Consumers interact with the system by scanning QR codes on 
products to verify their authenticity.  
When a product is registered, its associated information is recorded in a blockchain-
based tamper-evident ledger to ensure data integrity and prevent unauthorized modification. 
Each product is assigned a unique QR code that links to its corresponding backend 
verification record. During the verification process, the system validates the scanned QR 
code against stored records and monitors scan behaviour for abnormal patterns.  
To enhance security, the system incorporates a clone detection mechanism that 
analyses repeated scans of the same QR code across different locations or timeframes. When 
suspicious behaviour is detected, the syst em flags the product for further investigation. In 
addition, a revocation mechanism allows manufacturers to deactivate compromised 
products, ensuring that consumers receive accurate and up-to-date verification results. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
25 
Overall, the proposed system aims to provide a secure, transparent, and user-friendly 
solution for product authentication, addressing key weaknesses in existing QR -based and 
centralized verification systems. 
3.3.2 System Architecture 
The overall system architecture of the proposed product authentication system is 
shown in Figure 3.1.  
 
Figure 3.1 System Architecture of the Product Authentication System 
 
Figure 3.1 illustrates the system architecture, which follows a layered design 
consisting of the client, application, and data layers. Consumers interact with the system 
through a mobile -first web application to verify products by scanning QR codes, while 
manufacturers use an administrativ e dashboard to register products, revoke product status, 
and review system alerts. All requests are processed by the backend application layer, where 
authentication, QR integrity validation, clone detection, and ledger management are handled 
by dedicated m odules. Operational data is stored in a relational database, while critical 


--- PAGE 7 ---
26 
events such as product registration, verification, and revocation are recorded in a tamper -
evident ledger to ensure data integrity and auditability. 
3.3.3 Data Flow Diagram (Level 0) 
Figure 3.2 illustrates the Level 0 Data Flow Diagram of the Product Authentication 
System, providing a high -level view of the system boundary and its interactions with 
external entities. The diagram shows how consumers and manufacturers exchange data with 
the system for product verification, registration, and revocation, while internal data stores 
support scan logging, risk classification, and auditability. 
 
Figure 3.2 Data Flow Diagram (Level 0) of the Product Authentication System 
 
3.3.4 Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) 
Figure 3.3 illustrates the core data structures supporting the proposed product 
authentication system. Manufacturers register products, each of which is assigned a unique 
QR code. Scan events are rec orded to support verification and clone detection. The ledger 
structure is used to store tamper -evident records of product registration, scan activity, and 
revocation events, ensuring auditability and data integrity across the system.  


--- PAGE 8 ---
27 
 
Figure 3.3 Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) for Product Authentication System 
 
3.3.5 Use Case Diagram 
The system involves two primary actors, the Manufacturer and the Consumer. 
Figure 3.4 illustrates the main interaction between users and the system. 


--- PAGE 9 ---
28 
 
Figure 3.4 Use Case Diagram of the Product Authentication System 
 
Manufacturers Use Case Descriptions 
The Manufacturer is responsible for managing product information and maintaining 
product authenticity within the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 10 ---
29 
Table 3.1  Use Case for Register Product 
Use Case ID UC-01  
Use Case Name Register Product 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Allows the manufacturer to enter product details into the system. 
Upon successful submission, the product information is recorded as 
an immutable event in the tamper-evident ledger. 
Pre-Condition The manufacturer is logged into the system dashboard. 
Post-Condition Product is registered and ready for QR code generation. 
Includes UC-02: Generate QR Code 
 
Table 3.2 Use Case for Generate QR Code 
Use Case ID UC-02  
Use Case Name Generate QR Code 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  The system generates a unique QR code linked to the registered 
product’s ledger record. 
Pre-Condition The system has successfully validated the registration data from 
UC-01. 
Post-Condition QR code is issued and stored in the database. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 11 ---
30 
Table 3.3 Use Case for Revoke Product 
Use Case ID UC-03  
Use Case Name Revoke Product 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Enables the manufacturer to deactivate or recall products that are 
confirmed to be counterfeit or compromised. 
Pre-Condition The product exists in the system and is currently marked as 
"Active". 
Post-Condition Revocation event is recorded in the tamper -evident ledger and 
product status is updated. 
 
Table 3.4 Use Case for View Product Status 
Use Case ID UC-04  
Use Case Name View Product Status 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Allows the manufacturer to view the current status  of registered 
products to see which items are active, pending, or revoked. 
Pre-Condition The manufacturer has registered products in the system. 
Post-Condition The manufacturer identifies the current operational state of specific 
product units or batches. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
31 
Table 3.5 Use Case for View Scan Logs 
Use Case ID UC-05  
Use Case Name View Scan Logs 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Allows the manufacturer to monitor scan activities, including 
timestamps and locations, to identify unusual patterns that may 
indicate QR code cloning. 
Pre-Condition Consumers have scanned the products, and data has been recorded 
in the database layer 
Post-Condition The manufacturer gains insights into potential security threats or 
unauthorized duplications. 
 
Consumer Use Case Descriptions 
The Consumer interacts with the system mainly for product verification purposes. 
Table 3.6 Use Case for Scan QR Code 
Use Case ID UC-06  
Use Case Name Scan QR Code 
Actor  Consumer 
Description  The primary interaction where a consumer scans a product's QR 
code to begin the verification process. 
Pre-Condition The consumer has access to the web-based verification interface. 
Post-Condition The system initiates the verification logic (UC-07). 
Includes UC-07: Verify Product Authenticity 
 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
32 
Table 3.7 Use Case for Verify Product Authenticity 
Use Case ID UC-07  
Use Case Name Verify Product Authenticity 
Actor  Consumer (triggered by system) 
Description  The system validates the product by checking the tamper -evident 
ledger and scan history. 
Pre-Condition A QR code has been scanned (UC-06). 
Post-Condition Authenticity status and product information are displayed to the 
consumer. 
Includes UC-08: Check Revocation Status 
 
Table 3.8 Use Case for Check Revocation Status 
Use Case ID UC-08  
Use Case Name Check Revocation Status 
Actor  System / Tamper-Evident Ledger 
Description  An internal system operation that determines whether the product 
has been revoked by the manufacturer. 
Pre-Condition The product ID has been successfully located in the ledger records. 
Post-Condition The system identifies if the item is "Revoked" or "Active." 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
33 
Table 3.9 Use Case for View Product Information 
Use Case ID UC-09  
Use Case Name View Product Information 
Actor  Consumer 
Description  After verification, the consumer views details like product name, 
manufacturer, and status. 
Pre-Condition UC-07 (Verification) and UC -08 (Revocation Check) are 
completed. 
Post-Condition Consumer is informed about the specific details and origin of the 
product. 
 
Table 3.10 Use Case for Receive Revocation Alert 
Use Case ID UC-10  
Use Case Name Receive Revocation Alert 
Actor  Consumer 
Description  If a product has been marked as invalid by the manufacturer, the 
consumer receives a warning alert. 
Pre-Condition Verification logic identifies a "Revoked" flag on the ledger record. 
Post-Condition Warning message is displayed to the consumer. 
 
3.3.6 Activity Diagram 
Figure 3.5 illustrates the systematic logic of the product verification workflow, 
mapping the transition from the initial QR code scan to the final status display for the 
consumer.  

--- PAGE 15 ---
34 
 
Figure 3.5 Activity Diagram of the Consumer Product Verification Process 
 
The verification process is initiated when a consumer scans the product’s QR code. 
The system forwards the scanned data to the backend, which cross -references the 
information against the tamper-evident ledger to confirm that the product has been properly 


--- PAGE 16 ---
35 
registered. If no corresponding record is found, the product is immediately flagged as 
invalid.  
For registered products, the system performs additional validation by analysing scan 
history to identify potential QR code cloning and by checking the current revocation status 
recorded in the ledger. The process concludes by returning a clear verification result to the 
consumer, indicating whether the product is authentic, suspicious, or revoked. 
3.3.7 Sequence Diagram 
Sequence diagrams provide a visual representation of the interactions between 
system components over time, illustrating the order of operations and message flows during 
key processes. These diagrams are essential for understanding the dynamic behaviour of the 
proposed product authentication system. The following sections detail the primary sequence 
diagrams that demonstrate the system's core functionality.  
Figure 3.6 illustrates the workflow for registering new products in the authentication 
system. The process begins at the Manufacturer Dashboard, where essential product details 
such as product name and batch number are submitted. The backend system coordinates the 
registration workflow by validating the input data and recording the registration event  in a 
tamper-evident ledger. Once the ledger entry is successfully created, a unique QR code is 
generated and associated with the registered product. The product identifier and QR code 
reference are then stored in the relational database to support efficie nt retrieval and 
verification operations. This completes the product registration process while maintaining 
traceability and resistance to unauthorized modification.  

--- PAGE 17 ---
36 
 
Figure 3.6 Sequence Diagram for Product Registration 
 
Figure 3.7 illustrates the chronological communication between system components 
during a product verification request. The process is initiated when a consumer scans a QR 
code, which is transmitted from the user interface to the backend sys tem. The backend 
performs a multi-stage verification process by first retrieving the product’s registration and 
revocation status from the tamper-evident ledger. Subsequently, the backend executes a local 
analyzeScanHistory() function to evaluate scan patt erns and identify potential clone risk 
based on heuristic analysis. Finally, the verification outcome is returned to the user interface, 
where the consumer is informed of the product’s authenticity status or potential risk 
indication. 


--- PAGE 18 ---
37 
 
Figure 3.7 Sequence Diagram for Product Verification 
 
Figure 3.8 shows the process for administratively invalidating a product, such as for 
stolen goods or recalled batches. The process begins when the manufacturer identifies a 
product identifier and submits a revocation request through the administrative dashboard. 
The backend system processes this request by recording the revocation event in the tamper-
evident ledger. In parallel, the backend updates the product’s status in the relational database 
to ensure consistency across system components. This approach ensures that both the 
manufacturer dashboard and the consumer verification interface immediately reflect the 
revoked status of the product. 


--- PAGE 19 ---
38 
 
Figure 3.8 Sequence Diagram for Product Revocation 
 
3.3.8 Tamper-Evident Ledger Design 
The system incorporates a tamper -evident ledger to record critical product -related 
events in an immutable and auditable manner. Rather than functioning as a fully 
decentralized blockchain network, the ledger applies core blockchain principles such as 
cryptographic hash chaining and append -only data structures to ensure data integrity and 
traceability.  
Each ledger entry represents a significant system event, including product 
registration, QR code verification, and product revocation. These events are recor ded as 
sequential ledger blocks, forming a hash-linked chain that preserves the integrity of historical 
records. Any unauthorized modification to a stored block would break the hash linkage, 
making tampering immediately detectable. 
Ledger Block Structure 
Each ledger block contains a minimal set of metadata required to ensure immutability 
and integrity of recorded events. The block stores essential information such as hash values, 
references to previous blocks, and event data. Instead of storing full product or scan details, 


--- PAGE 20 ---
39 
the system uses a structured payload containing reference identifiers, ensuring efficient 
storage while maintaining traceability. 
Table 3.11 Ledger Block Structure 
Field Name Description 
block_height Position of the block within the chain 
hash Hash of the current block 
previous_hash Hash of the previous block to ensure chaining 
recalculated_hash Recomputed hash used for validation 
data_payload Contains event type and reference ID  
(REGISTER, VERIFY, REVOKE) 
block_valid Indicates whether the block is valid after verification 
timestamp Date and time when the block was created 
 
Hashing Mechanism 
The integrity of each ledger block is maintained using the SHA -256 cryptographic 
hash function. The block hash (hash) is computed by hashing a concatenation of key fields, 
including the previous_hash, timestamp, and data_payload. This ensures that each block is 
uniquely bound to its predecessor, and any modification to a block will result i n a hash 
mismatch, thereby invalidating all subsequent blocks in the chain. 
To support integrity verification, the system recalculates the hash 
(recalculated_hash) during validation and compares it with the stored hash value. Any 
inconsistency indicates po tential tampering. The first block in the ledger, known as 
the genesis block, uses a predefined value for the previous_hash field to initialise the chain. 
Ledger Operation and Integration 
All interactions with the tamper-evident ledger are managed by the backend system. 
When a relevant event occurs, such as product registration, verification, or revocation, the 

--- PAGE 21 ---
40 
backend generates a new ledger block, computes its hash, and appends it to the existing 
chain. Once recorded, ledger entries are immutable and cannot be altered or removed without 
compromising the integrity of the entire chain. 
The ledger operates alongside the relational database, with each component serving 
a distinct role. The database supports operational queries and user interactions, while the 
ledger maintains an immutable audit trail of critical events. The event details are stored in a 
structured data_payload, which contains reference identifiers rather than full data records. 
This separation enhances system efficiency while ensuring traceabili ty, transparency, and 
reliable product verification. 
3.3.9 QR Code Security Design and Threat Assumptions 
The QR security design aims to prevent trivial forgery or manipulation while 
operating under realistic attacker capabilities in a consumer-facing environment. Rather than 
relying on secrecy of the QR code itself, the design enforces authenticity and integrity 
through backend verification and cryptographic validation. This approach balances 
cryptographic protection with practical deployment constraints, acknow ledging that QR 
codes are publicly visible once products enter the market.  
QR Code Content Design 
Each QR code encodes a cryptographically protected verification payload rather than 
raw product information. The payload consists of a randomly generated, non -sequential 
qr_id, an optional issuance timestamp, and a cryptographic integrity token. No plainte xt 
product details or sequential identifiers are stored directly in the QR code in order to prevent 
information leakage and identifier enumeration.  

--- PAGE 22 ---
41 
The integrity token is generated using a hash -based message authentication code 
(HMAC) computed by the backend system with a server-side secret key. Upon scanning, the 
backend recomputes the HMAC over the received payload and validates it before any 
verification logic is executed. Any modification to the QR content invalidates the integrity  
check, ensuring that attackers cannot forge or alter QR data without access to the secret key.  
If a URL is used within the QR code, it functions solely as a transport mechanism to 
deliver the encoded payload to the verification service. Trust decisions are not based on the 
URL itself but are determined exclusively through backend cryptographic validation and 
database checks. 
Backend Protection and Enumeration Resistance 
All QR scan requests are processed by the backend verification service and validated 
against registered records in the QR_Code table. Requests containing unknown, malformed, 
or invalid payloads are rejected and logged for monitoring and analysis. Manufacturer and 
administrative operations, including product registration, QR issuance, and revocation, are 
restricted to authenticated users through the management dashboard, ensuring that only 
authorized entities can perform sensitive actions. 
Threat Assumptions 
The system is designed under the following realistic attacker assumptions:  
 An attacker can physically copy and reprint valid QR codes onto counterfeit 
products.  
 An attacker can collect or scrape QR codes from legitimate products.  
 An attacker can replay scan requests to the verification backend.  

--- PAGE 23 ---
42 
 An attacker may attempt to tamper with stored records or product status. 
The system assumes that attackers cannot access backend secret keys, bypass authenticated 
manufacturer controls, or modify ledger records without detection. 
Security Scope and Limitations 
While cryptographic protect ions prevent QR code tampering and unauthorized 
backend manipulation, they cannot prevent the physical duplication of a valid QR code. 
Consequently, QR security is intentionally combined with scan history analysis and 
revocation logic. This layered approac h enables cloned QR codes to be identified through 
anomalous usage patterns and invalidated through administrative intervention when 
necessary. 
3.3.10 Clone Detection Design 
The clone detection mechanism is designed to identify abnormal QR code usage 
patterns tha t may indicate unauthorized duplication of authentic product identifiers. The 
mechanism does not aim to conclusively prove that a product is counterfeit. Instead, it 
provides early risk indicators that support manufacturer monitoring and decision -making. 
The system performs rule -based scan analysis using historical scan data to assess whether 
the same QR code is being used in a suspicious manner. 
Each QR code scan is processed as part of the product verification workflow. When 
a verification request is received, the backend validates the signed QR payload and retrieves 
the related QR code and product record from the database. The system then records the scan 
event in the scan_log table before performing clone -risk analysis. The logged metadata 
includes the s can timestamp, IP address, device information, and approximate geographic 

--- PAGE 24 ---
43 
location derived from IP geolocation. Although device information is stored for reference 
and audit purposes, the clone detection decision mainly focuses on location distance, scan 
timing, and scan frequency across distant locations. 
Detection Criteria 
Clone detection is evaluated using configurable thresholds within a defined time 
window. A QR code is flagged as suspicious when one or more of the following conditions 
are satisfied: 
 The same QR code is scanned repeatedly within a short time window from 
geographically distant locations. 
 Consecutive scans originate from locations that are too far apart to be 
realistically travelled within the recorded time difference. 
 The scan frequency exceeds the expected behaviour only when the scans 
involve meaningfully distant locations. 
This design helps reduce false positives. For example, repeated scans from the same 
location or nearby locations are treated as normal behaviour because a consumer, retailer, or 
administrator may scan the same product multiple times during testing, purchase 
verification, or demonstration. 
Risk Classification 
Based on the analysis result, the system assigns one of the following risk levels:  
 Low Risk:  Scan behaviour appears normal. This includes repeated scans 
from the same or nearby location. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
44 
 Medium Risk: Repeated scan behaviour is detected across distant locations, 
but it does not reach the high-risk threshold.  
 High Risk: Strong indicators of QR code duplication ar e detected, such as 
geographically distant scans occurring within an unrealistic travel time or 
excessive scans across distant locations. 
Risk assessments are stored in the  clone_risk table and are used to support 
monitoring and investigation. The system does not automatically revoke products based on 
clone detection. Revocation remains an administrative decision. 
System Behaviour 
 When a QR code is assigned Medium or High risk, the consumer verification result 
may be displayed as suspicious. The system pro vides a warning message to indicate that 
unusual scan behaviour has been detected. However, clone detection does not override 
revocation logic. If a product has already been revoked, the system returns the revoked status 
regardless of scan behaviour. 
Location Source and Reliability 
Scan location data is obtained using approximate IP-based geolocation. This method 
provides coarse geographic information rather than precise GPS coordinates. Therefore, 
location is used only as a contextual indicator and not as definitive proof of counterfeiting. 
Threshold and Time Window Assumptions 
The detection thresholds are configurable. For example, the system may use a ten -
minute scan window, a distance threshold of 50 km, and a maximum travel time threshold 
of 10 minutes. These values help determine whether scan behaviour is realistic or suspicious. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
45 
Pseudocode for Clone Detection Logic 
function analyzeScanHistory(scans): 
    sort scans by scan_time 
    hasDifferentLocations = checkMultipleApproximateLocations(scans) 
    hasFarLocations = checkDistantLocations(scans) 
    if hasDifferentLocations and hasFarLocations 
       and scans.count > HIGH_SCAN_THRESHOLD: 
        return HIGH_RISK 
    for each consecutive pair of scans: 
        scan1 = previous scan 
        scan2 = current scan 
        location1 = parseLocation(scan1.location) 
        location2 = parseLocation(scan2.location) 
        if location1 is missing or location2 is missing: 
            continue 
        distance = calculateDistance(location1, location2) 
        time_difference = calculateTimeDifference(scan1.time, scan2.time) 
        if distance > DISTANCE_THRESHOLD 
           and time_difference < MAX_TRAVEL_TIME: 
            return HIGH_RISK 
    if hasDifferentLocations and hasFarLocations 
       and scans.count > MEDIUM_SCAN_THRESHOLD: 
        return MEDIUM_RISK 
    return LOW_RISK 
 

--- PAGE 27 ---
46 
3.3.11 Revocation Mechanism Design 
The revocation mechanism enables manufacturers to administratively invalidate 
registered products that are identified as counterfeit, recalled, or compromised. This 
mechanism ensures that once a product is revoked, its status is consistently enforced acros s 
the system and is immediately visible to both manufacturers and consumers.  
Revocation is treated as a state transition event rather than a data deletion operation. 
This approach preserves historical records while ensuring that invalid products can no longer 
be verified as authentic. Revocation is treated as a permanent and irreversible state transition 
within the system to preserve audit integrity and prevent abuse. Once revoked, a product 
cannot return to an active state, and any correction requires a n ew product registration and 
QR code issuance. 
Consumer-Side Behaviour  
When a consumer scans a QR code associated with a revoked product:  
 The system detects the revoked status during verification  
 A high-priority alert is displayed to the consumer  
 The product is explicitly marked as Revoked or Invalid  
Revoked items cannot return an Authentic status under any circumstances.  
Revocation Policy  
To maintain system integrity and auditability:  
 Revocation is irreversible within the system  
 Any correction requires a new product registration with a new QR code  

--- PAGE 28 ---
47 
 All revocation events remain permanently recorded in the ledger  
This policy prevents abuse and ensures that revocation decisions are transparent and 
accountable.  
Pseudocode for Revocation Logic 
function revokeProduct(product_id, reason): 
    product = getProduct(product_id) 
    if product does not exist: 
        return "Product not found" 
    if product.status != "active": 
        return "Invalid revocation request" 
    begin transaction 
update product 
        set status = "revoked", 
            revoke_reason = reason, 
            updated_at = current_timestamp 
        where product_id = product_id 
    update qr_code 
        set is_active = false 
        where product_id = product_id 
    appendLedgerBlock( 
        data_type = "REVOKE", 
        data_reference_id = product_id 
    ) 
    commit transaction 

--- PAGE 29 ---
48 
    return "Product revoked successfully" 
 
3.3.12 API Design and Endpoints 
The system implements a REST-style API to connect the frontend interfaces with the 
backend services. The API is divided into consumer -facing endpoints and manufacturer -
facing endpoints. Consumer endpoints handle QR code verification, while manufacturer 
endpoints support login, product registration, produ ct listing, revocation, analytics, 
revocation history, and ledger viewing. The /api/verify endpoint validates the signed QR 
payload, records scan metadata, performs clone -risk analysis, checks product revocation 
status, and returns the verification result.  Manufacturer endpoints are protected by a login 
mechanism. Although some backend routes use the term admin, they represent manufacturer 
access in this prototype. Ledger recording and clone-risk analysis are not exposed as separate 
public endpoints. They a re handled internally by the backend during registration, 
verification, and revocation workflows. 
Core API Endpoints  
Table 3.12 List of API Core Endpoints 
Category Endpoint Method Description 
Consumer /api/verify POST Verifies a scanned signed QR 
payload, records the scan, 
performs clone -risk analysis, 
and returns the product 
authenticity status. 
Manufacturer  /api/admin/login POST Authenticates the manufacturer 
user and creates a login session. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
49 
Manufacturer /api/admin/logout POST Logs out the manufacturer user 
and clears the login session. 
Manufacturer /api/admin/session GET Checks whether the 
manufacturer login session is 
still valid. 
Manufacturer /api/product/register POST Registers a new pro duct, 
generates a unique QR 
identifier, creates a signed 
verification URL, generates a 
QR code, and records the 
registration event in the ledger. 
Manufacturer /api/product/revoke POST Revokes an active product, 
stores the revocation reason, 
disables the related QR code, 
and records the revocation 
event in the ledger. 
Manufacturer /api/product/count GET Retrieves the total number of 
registered products. 
Manufacturer /api/product/revoked/count GET Retrieves the total number of 
revoked products. 
Manufacturer /api/product/list GET Retrieves the list of registered 
products, including product 
status and QR information. 
Manufacturer /api/product/revoked GET Retrieves the revocation 
history, including revoked 
products and revocation 
reasons. 
Manufacturer /api/product/suspicious GET Retrieves products with clone -
risk indicators for monitoring. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
50 
Manufacturer /api/scan/count GET Retrieves the total number of 
scan records. 
Manufacturer /api/scan/daily GET Retrieves daily scan counts for 
analytics display. 
Manufacturer /api/scan/logs GET Retrieves scan log records with 
product details, location 
information, and scan status. 
Manufacturer /api/ledger GET Retrieves ledger blocks and 
validates the integrity of the 
tamper-evident ledger. 
 
3.3.13 User Interface Design 
Figure 3.9 shows the manufacturer’s dashboard interface with a centralized overview 
of the system. The dashboard displays real -time analytics, including the total number of 
registered products and active scan activities. It serves as the p rimary control centre for 
manufacturers to register products, generate unique QR codes linked to ledger records, and 
manage product lifecycles through the revocation module. This interface supports efficient 
monitoring and administrative control while ensuring consistency with the system’s tamper-
evident ledger design. 

--- PAGE 32 ---
51 
 
Figure 3.9 Manufacturer Administrative Dashboard Interface 
 
Figure 3.10 illustrates a dashboard for manufacturers to monitor products in real 
time. It highlights key performance indicators, provides insights into product lifecycles, and 
shows concise status summaries of active, pending, and revoked products recorde d in the 
tamper-evident ledger. This enables administrators to manage supply chain integrity, track 
top-performing products, and address potential security threats.  


--- PAGE 33 ---
52 
 
Figure 3.10 Manufacturer Analytics Dashboard Interface 
 
Figure 3.11 shows the revocation history interface. This interface allows 
manufacturers to track and manage all invalidated product records. It provides a quick 
overview of total revocations, affected units, and action status, while a detailed list shows 
individual entries with identifiers, severity, and technical notes. This interface enhances 
transparency and accountability by ensuring that all revocation events are consistently 
recorded and traceable through the tamper -evident ledger , thereby supporting system 
integrity and auditability. 


--- PAGE 34 ---
53 
 
Figure 3.11 Manufacturer Revocation History Interface 
 
Figure 3.12 shows the QR code scanning interface used by consumers during the 
verification proc ess. The interface is designed for ease of use, featuring a high -contrast 
viewfinder and real-time camera feedback to ensure accurate scanning. This module serves 
as the entry point to the consumer verification workflow, capturing the encrypted QR data 
and transmitting it to the backend system for validation against the tamper-evident ledger.  


--- PAGE 35 ---
54 
 
Figure 3.12 Consumer Scanning Module 
 
Figure 3.13 is displayed when a product passes all three security tiers, which  are 
identity validation, clone detection, and revocation status check. The prominent use of green 
colour coding and a checkmark icon provides immediate visual confirmation to the 
consumer that the product is genuine and safe for use.  


--- PAGE 36 ---
55 
 
Figure 3.13 Verification Result (Authentic Result) 
 
Figure 3.14 is triggered when the system detects a "Replay Attack" through scan 
history analysis. The yellow warning theme alerts the consumer that the specific QR code 
has been scanned in multiple locations or across an unrealistic timeframe, indicating that the 
code may have been duplicated by a counterfeiter. 


--- PAGE 37 ---
56 
 
Figure 3.14 Verification Result (Suspicious/Cloned Warning) 
 
Figure 3.15 is used to display high-priority alerts during the verification process. This 
screen is shown when a product has been officially revoked by the manufacturer or when the 
scanned QR code does not exist in the tamper -evident ledger. The interface clearly warns 
the consumer of the potential risk and provides guidance to avoid using the product and to 
report the issue if necessary. 


--- PAGE 38 ---
57 
 
Figure 3.15 Verification Result (Revoked or Invalid Status) 
 
3.4 Summary  
This chapter presented the requirement analysis and system design for the proposed 
product authentication system. The functional and non -functional requirements were 
identified based on literature review and observed limitations of existing solutions. Thes e 
requirements define the expected behaviour, performance, and security aspects of the 
system.  


--- PAGE 39 ---
58 
The chapter also outlined the system design, including the overall system 
architecture, Level 0 data flow diagram, use case interactions, activity flow, sequenc e of 
operations, and user interface design. These design elements provide a clear understanding 
of how users interact with the system and how product verification, clone detection, and 
revocation processes are carried out. The information in this chapter s erves as a foundation 
for the system implementation, which will be discussed in the next chapter. 
 

--- PAGE 40 ---
59 
CHAPTER 4  
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the implementation of the proposed product authentication 
system. The system was developed based on the design outlined in Chapter 3 and integrates 
a backend server, a PostgreSQL database, and a web -based user interface for both 
manufacturers and consumers. The purpose of this chapter is to explain how the proposed 
design was translated into a functional prototype and to describe how the implemented 
modules operate cohesively in practice.  
The completed prototype supports product regis tration, QR code generation, QR 
payload protection, product verification, scan logging, clone risk detection, product 
revocation, and tamper-evident ledger recording. The implementation focuses on delivering 
an end-to-end proof of concept within a controll ed environment. This chapter also outlines 
the system requirements, development setup, implementation details, and the overall 
workflow of the completed system. 
4.2 System Requirements 
4.2.1 Hardware Requirement 
The system was developed and tested using a laptop equ ipped with an AMD Ryzen 
5 processor with Radeon Graphics and 16 GB of RAM. This hardware configuration 
provided sufficient computational capability and memory to support local development, 
backend execution, database management, and browser-based testing.  

--- PAGE 41 ---
60 
The processor handled server -side request processing, QR code generation, hash 
computation, and ledger -related operations, while the available memory supported 
multitasking activities such as running the code editor, database tools, local server, and 
browser simultaneously without significant performance degradation. Adequate storage 
space was also required to install software tools, project dependencies, and database files.  
An internet connection was required during development for downloading 
dependencies, accessing technical documentation, and supporting certain testing activities 
such as IP -based geolocation lookup. Overall, the hardware used was sufficient to support 
stable development and testing of the prototype in a controlled environment.  
4.2.2 Software Requirements 
The system was developed on the Windows operating system. The backend was 
implemented using Node.js and the Express framework, which were used to provide server-
side logic, REST-style API routing, QR payload validation, clone detection logic, revocation 
handling, and ledger integration.  
PostgreSQL was used as the relational database management system to store 
structured data such as product records, QR identifiers, scan logs, clone risk assessments, 
and ledger blocks. Database interaction wa s handled through the pg library. The frontend 
was implemented using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to create a web -based dashboard and 
consumer-facing verification interface. Frontend -backend communication was performed 
using the Fetch API.  
Several development tools were used throughout the implementation process. Visual 
Studio Code was used as the primary source code editor, pgAdmin was used for database 

--- PAGE 42 ---
61 
administration, and Postman was used for API testing. Additional supporting packages 
included dotenv for e nvironment configuration, qrcode for QR image generation, and cors 
for handling cross-origin requests during testing.  
4.3 System Development 
4.3.1 Installation and Configuration 
The development environment was prepared by installing Node.js, PostgreSQL, and 
the req uired development tools. After the project structure was created, the necessary 
dependencies were installed using npm. These dependencies included Express for backend 
routing, pg for PostgreSQL connectivity, dotenv for environment variable management, and 
qrcode for QR code generation.  
System configuration was managed through an environment file (.env) to improve 
maintainability and reduce hardcoded values in the source code. Important configuration 
values included the public verification URL, database con nection settings, HMAC secret 
key for QR security, and threshold values for clone detection. This approach made the 
implementation easier to manage and allowed sensitive values to be kept separate from the 
main application logic.  
After configuration was c ompleted, the Express server was connected to the 
PostgreSQL database and tested locally. Once the backend routes were functioning correctly, 
the frontend pages were integrated with the backend API to support full system interaction 
through the browser. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
62 
4.4 System Implementation 
4.4.1 Backend Implementation 
The backend system was implemented using Node.js and Express following a REST-
style API structure. It handles the main operations of the authentication workflow, including 
product registration, QR generation, sign ed payload verification, scan logging, clone risk 
evaluation, revocation processing, analytics retrieval, and ledger block creation.  
During product registration, the backend receives product details from the 
manufacturer dashboard, inserts the product int o the database, generates a unique non -
sequential QR identifier, constructs a signed verification payload, and returns a QR 
verification URL together with a generated QR image. A corresponding ledger block is also 
appended to record the registration event.  
router.post("/product/register", async (req, res) => { 
  const { name, manufacturer_id, serial_number } = req.body; 
  const client = await pool.connect(); 
  try { 
    await client.query("BEGIN"); 
    const productResult = await client.query( 
      `INSERT INTO product (manufacturer_id, product_name, 
serial_number) 
       VALUES ($1, $2, $3) RETURNING *`, 
      [manufacturer_id, name, serial_number] 
    ); 
    const product = productResult.rows[0]; 
    const qr_value = crypto.randomUUID(); 

--- PAGE 44 ---
63 
    await client.query( 
      `INSERT INTO qr_code (product_id, qr_value) 
       VALUES ($1, $2)`, 
      [product.product_id, qr_value] 
    ); 
    await insertLedger("REGISTER", product.product_id, 
client); 
    const baseUrl = buildPublicBaseUrl(req); 
    const { payload, qrUrl } = buildVerificationUrl(baseUrl, 
qr_value); 
    const qrImage = await QRCode.toDataURL(qrUrl); 
    await client.query("COMMIT"); 
    res.json({ 
      message: "Product registered", 
      qr_value, 
      qr_payload: payload, 
      qr_url: qrUrl, 
      qr_image: qrImage 
    }); 
  } catch (err) { 
    await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
    console.error("ERROR:", err); 
    res.status(500).json({ error: "Server error" }); 
  } finally { 
    client.release(); 
  } 
}); 
Figure 4.1 Code Snippet for Product Registration Route 
 

--- PAGE 45 ---
64 
This route shows how the backend handles product registration by combining 
database insertion, QR identifier creation, signed payload generation, and ledger re cording 
into a single workflow. This ensures that a newly registered product is immediately linked 
to a verifiable QR code and an auditable event record.  
The backend also processes verification and revocation requests. During verification, 
the backend val idates the signed QR payload before any database lookup is performed. If 
valid, the system retrieves the associated product, stores the scan metadata, evaluates clone 
risk, checks whether the product has been revoked, and returns the correct verification status. 
Revocation is handled through a dedicated route that changes the product status, disables the 
QR code, and appends a revocation event to the ledger.  
router.post("/product/revoke", async (req, res) => { 
  const { product_id, reason } = req.body; 
  const client = await pool.connect(); 
  try { 
    await client.query("BEGIN"); 
    const productResult = await client.query( 
      `SELECT product_status FROM product WHERE product_id 
= $1`, 
      [product_id] 
    ); 
    if (productResult.rows.length === 0) { 
      await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
      return res.status(404).json({ error: "Product not 
found" }); 
    } 
     

--- PAGE 46 ---
65 
if (productResult.rows[0].product_status !== "active") { 
      await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
      return res.status(400).json({ 
        error: "Invalid revocation request. Only active 
products can be revoked." 
      }); 
    } 
    await client.query( 
      `UPDATE product 
       SET product_status = 'revoked', 
           revoke_reason = $2, 
           updated_at = NOW() 
       WHERE product_id = $1`, 
      [product_id, reason] 
    ); 
    await client.query( 
      `UPDATE qr_code 
       SET is_active = false 
       WHERE product_id = $1`, 
      [product_id] 
    ); 
    await insertLedger("REVOKE", product_id, client); 
    await client.query("COMMIT"); 
    res.json({ message: "Product revoked with reason" }); 
  } catch (err) { 
    await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
    console.error(err); 
    res.status(500).json({ error: "Revocation failed" }); 
  } finally { 
    client.release(); 

--- PAGE 47 ---
66 
  } 
});  
Figure 4.2 Code Snippet for Product Revocation Route 
 
This revocation route demonstrates how the backend enforces revocation as an 
irreversible administrative action for active products only. It ensures that the product state, 
QR activation status, and ledger history remain consistent. 
4.4.2 Database Implementation 
The database was implemented according to the relational structure designed in 
Chapter 3 and refined to support the final prototype. It contains several interconnected tables 
that collectively support product registration, QR management, scan tracking, clone -risk 
evaluation, revocation management, and ledger recording.  
The product table stores the main product information, including product name, serial 
number, current status, and revocation reason. The qr_code table stores the unique QR 
identifier assigned to each product and its activation status. The scan_log table stores the 
history of verification scans, including QR reference, timestamp,  IP address, device 
information, and approximate location. The clone_risk table stores the most recent risk 
assessment for each QR code. The ledger_block table stores sequential tamper -evident 
ledger records for registration, verification, and revocation events.  
Relationships between these tables are maintained using foreign keys to preserve 
consistency between products, QR identifiers, scan history, and risk records. This relational 
structure provides both operational efficiency and traceability of critical system events. 

--- PAGE 48 ---
67 
 
Figure 4.3 Implemented Database Table in pgAdmin 
 
4.4.3 Frontend Implementation 
The frontend was implemented as a web -based interface using HTML, CSS, and 
JavaScript. It supports both manufactur er-side operations and consumer -side verification. 
The manufacturer-facing side includes the admin login page, registration dashboard, product 
list page, analytics page, and revocation history page, while the consumer -facing side 
includes the product verification page.  
The dashboard enables manufacturers to register products and immediately view the 
generated QR code for download. The product list page displays all registered products and 
provides a revocation action for active items. The analytics page presents summary statistics 
such as total products, total scans, revoked items, and scan activity. The revocation history 
page displays revoked products and their associated information.  
The frontend communicates with the backend asynchronously using the Fetch API. 
This a llows the pages to request data and submit actions dynamically, improving 


--- PAGE 49 ---
68 
responsiveness and usability. A lightweight API configuration mechanism was also 
implemented to support correct communication with the backend in different local testing 
environments. 
 
Figure 4.4 Admin Login Interface 
  
 
Figure 4.5 Manufacturer Dashboard Interface 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 50 ---
69 
 
Figure 4.6  Product List Interface 
 
 
Figure 4.7 Analytics Dashboard 
 
 


--- PAGE 51 ---
70 
 
Figure 4.8 Revocation History Interface 
 
4.4.4 Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
The graphical user interface was designed with clarity, simplicity, and usability in 
mind. On the manufacturer side, a structured dashboard layout with a sidebar menu, input 
forms, and summary cards was used to support efficient navigation across the main modules. 
This design helps the user move easily between registration, product listing, analytics, and 
revocation tracking.  
On the consumer side, the verification interface was designed to clearly present 
product authenticity results using different visual states. Authentic products are shown using 
a green success state. Suspicious products are shown using an orange cautionary 
recommendation banner. Revoked and invalid products are presented using a red warning 
state to clearly indicate that the item should not be trusted.  
This visual design improves the readability of verification results and supports 
quicker user understanding during product authentication.  


--- PAGE 52 ---
71 
 
Figure 4.9 Consumer Scanning Module 
 


--- PAGE 53 ---
72 
 
Figure 4.10 Authentic Product Verification Interface 
 
 


--- PAGE 54 ---
73 
 
Figure 4.11  Suspicious Product Verification Interface 
 
 
Figure 4.12 Revoked Product Verification Interface 
 


--- PAGE 55 ---
74 
 
Figure 4.13  Invalid Product Verification Interface 
 
4.4.5 QR Code Security Implementation 
QR code security was implemented by storing a cr yptographically protected 
verification payload inside the QR code instead of storing raw product information. Each 
payload contains a non-sequential QR identifier, an issuance timestamp, and a cryptographic 
signature. This design reduces the risk of data e xposure and makes QR tampering easier to 
detect.  
The backend generates the signature using HMAC -SHA256 together with a server-
side secret key stored in the environment configuration. During product registration, a signed 
payload is created and embedded into the verification URL. This URL is then encoded as a 
QR image and returned to the frontend.  
 


--- PAGE 56 ---
75 
function signPayload(qrId, issuedAt) { 
  return crypto 
    .createHmac("sha256", getQrSecret()) 
    .update(`${qrId}.${issuedAt}`) 
    .digest("hex"); 
} 
function buildSignedPayload(qrId, issuedAt = new 
Date().toISOString()) { 
  const payload = { 
    qr_id: qrId, 
    issued_at: issuedAt, 
    sig: signPayload(qrId, issuedAt) 
  }; 
 
Return 
Buffer.from(JSON.stringify(payload)).toString("base64url"); 
}  
Figure 4.14 Code Snippet for HMAC Signature Generation 
 
This code shows how the QR identifier and issuance timestamp are protected using 
a server-generated HMAC signature. The resulting payload is then encoded into a format 
suitable for inclusion in the QR verification URL.  
When a consumer scans a QR code, the backend validates the signed payload before 
any database query is performed. If the payload is missing, malformed, or cryptographically 
invalid, the request i s rejected immediately. This prevents modified QR data from being 
treated as legitimate input.  

--- PAGE 57 ---
76 
function verifySignedPayload(encodedPayload) { 
  if (!encodedPayload) { 
    return { valid: false, reason: "Missing QR payload" }; 
  } 
  try { 
    const parsed = JSON.parse( 
      Buffer.from(encodedPayload,"base64url").toString("utf8") 
    ); 
    const { qr_id: qrId, issued_at: issuedAt, sig } = parsed; 
    if (!qrId || !issuedAt || !sig) { 
      return { valid: false, reason: "Incomplete QR payload" }; 
    } 
    const expectedSig = signPayload(qrId, issuedAt); 
    const isValid = 
      sig.length === expectedSig.length && 
      crypto.timingSafeEqual(Buffer.from(sig), 
Buffer.from(expectedSig)); 
    if (!isValid) { 
      return { valid: false, reason: "Invalid QR signature" }; 
    } 
    return { 
      valid: true, 
      qrId, 
      issuedAt 
    }; 
  } catch (err) { 
    return { valid: false, reason: "Malformed QR payload" }; 
  } 

--- PAGE 58 ---
77 
}  
Figure 4.15 Code Snippet for Signed QR Payload Validation 
 
This validation function ensures that only authentic and unmodified QR payloads are 
processed by the system. It forms an essential part of the QR security mechanism. 
 
Figure 4.16  Generated QR Code with Signed Verification Payload 
4.4.6 Product Verification Module 
The product verification module is responsible for determining the authenticity state 
of a scanned product. When a verification request is received, the backend first validates the 
signed QR payload. If the payload is valid, the corresponding QR identifier  is matched to a 
registered record in the database.  
router.post("/verify", async (req, res) => { 
  const { payload } = req.body; 
  try { 
    const validatedPayload = verifySignedPayload(payload); 
    if (!validatedPayload.valid) { 
      return res.json({ 


--- PAGE 59 ---
78 
        status: "Invalid", 
        message: validatedPayload.reason 
      }); 
    } 
    const result = await pool.query( 
      `SELECT q.qr_id, q.qr_value, q.is_active, 
              p.product_id, p.product_name, p.serial_number, 
              p.product_status, p.revoke_reason 
       FROM qr_code q 
       JOIN product p ON q.product_id = p.product_id 
       WHERE q.qr_value = $1`, 
      [validatedPayload.qrId] 
    ); 
    if (result.rows.length === 0) { 
      return res.json({ 
        status: "Invalid", 
        message: "QR payload does not match a registered 
product" 
      }); 
    } 
    const data = result.rows[0]; 
    if (data.product_status === "revoked" || data.is_active 
=== false) { 
      return res.json({ 
        status: "Revoked", 
        reason: data.revoke_reason, 
        message: "This product has been revoked" 
      }); 
    } 
    return res.json({ 

--- PAGE 60 ---
79 
      status: "Authentic", 
      product: data.product_name, 
      serial: data.serial_number, 
      message: "Product verified successfully" 
    }); 
  } catch (err) { 
    console.error("ERROR:", err.message); 
    res.status(500).json({ error: "Server error" }); 
  } 
}); 
Figure 4.17 Code Snippet for Verification Request Processing 
 
This code shows that the  verification route first performs cryptographic validation 
and then uses the decoded QR identifier to retrieve the associated product record from the 
database. This helps ensure that product verification depends on both payload integrity and 
backend record existence. 
Once the product is identified, the backend evaluates the product’s current status and 
recent scan behaviour. If the product is active and scan behaviour appears normal, the result 
is returned as authentic. If suspicious behaviour is detected, the system returns a suspicious 
result. If the product has been revoked, it is returned as revoked regardless of scan behaviour. 
if (data.product_status === "revoked" || data.is_active === 
false) { 
  return res.json({ 
    status: "Revoked", 
    reason: data.revoke_reason, 
    message: "This product has been revoked" 
  }); 

--- PAGE 61 ---
80 
} 
 
let status = "Authentic"; 
 
if (riskAssessment.risk === "Medium" || riskAssessment.risk 
=== "High") { 
  status = "Suspicious"; 
} 
 
return res.json({ 
  status, 
  product: data.product_name, 
  serial: data.serial_number, 
  scans: scanCount, 
  risk: riskAssessment.risk, 
  message: riskAssessment.message 
});  
Figure 4.18 Code Snippet for Verification Response Logic 
 
This logic determines the final verification outcome shown to the consumer. It 
ensures that revoked products can never appear authentic and that suspicious scan behaviour 
is communicated through a separate advisory state. 
4.4.7 Scan Tracking and Risk Detection 
Each successful verificatio n request is recorded in the  scan_log table before clone-
risk analysis is performed. The stored metadata includes the QR reference, IP address, device 
information, approximate location, and timestamp. Although device information is stored 
for audit and monitoring purposes, the clone-risk decision is mainly based on scan frequency, 

--- PAGE 62 ---
81 
location distance, and scan timing. These records provide the behavioural history required 
for counterfeit-risk detection. 
await client.query( 
  `INSERT INTO scan_log (qr_id, ip_a ddress, device_type, 
scan_location) 
   VALUES ($1, $2, $3, $4)`, 
  [data.qr_id, ip, device, location] 
); 
 
await insertLedger("VERIFY", data.qr_id, client); 
Figure 4.19 Code Snippet for Scan Log Recording 
 
This code shows how each verification scan is logged and then appended to the 
ledger. Scan recording supports both analytical monitoring and subsequent clone -risk 
evaluation. 
The clone detection mechanism was implemented as a heuristic process that 
evaluates recent scan behaviour within a configurable time window. The mechanism checks 
whether the same QR code is scanned from geographically distant locations within an 
unrealistic timeframe. It also considers repeated scans only when the scan locations are 
meaningfully different and exceed the configured distance threshold. Therefore, repeated 
scans from the same or nearby locations can still be treated as normal behaviour, reducing 
false positives during legitimate consumer use.  
function hasMultipleApproximateLocations(scans) { 
  const locations = new Set(); 
 

--- PAGE 63 ---
82 
  scans.forEach(scan => { 
    const location = parseLocation(scan.scan_location); 
    if (location) { 
locations.add(`${location.latitude.toFixed(3)}, 
${location.longitude.toFixed(3)}`); 
    } 
  }); 
  return locations.size > 1; 
} 
function hasDistantLocations(scans) { 
  const locations = scans 
    .map(scan => parseLocation(scan.scan_location)) 
    .filter(Boolean); 
  for (let firstIndex = 0; firstIndex < locations.length; 
firstIndex += 1) { 
    for ( 
      let secondIndex = firstIndex + 1; 
      secondIndex < locations.length; 
      secondIndex += 1 
    ) { 
      if ( 
        haversineDistanceKm(locations[firstIndex], 
locations[secondIndex]) > 
        DISTANCE_THRESHOLD_KM 
      ) { 
        return true; 
      } 
    } 
  } 
 

--- PAGE 64 ---
83 
  return false; 
} 
Figure 4.20 Code Snippet for Location Context Detection 
 
 The functions above determine whether scans occurred from multiple approximate 
locations and whether those locations are far enough apart to be considered suspicious. This 
avoids marking repeated scans from the same location as suspicious. 
function analyzeScanHistory(scans) { 
  const hasDifferentLocations = 
hasMultipleApproximateLocations(scans); 
  const hasFarLocations = hasDistantLocations(scans); 
 
  if (hasDifferentLocations && hasFarLocations && 
scans.length > SCAN_HIGH_RISK_COUNT) { 
    return { 
      risk: "High", 
      message: "Multiple scans detected from distant 
locations within a short verification window" 
    }; 
  } 
 
  for (let index = 1; index < scans.length; index += 1) { 
    const previous = scans[index - 1]; 
    const current = scans[index]; 
 
    const previousLocation = 
parseLocation(previous.scan_location); 
    const currentLocation = 
parseLocation(current.scan_location); 
 

--- PAGE 65 ---
84 
    if (!previousLocation || !currentLocation) continue; 
 
    const distanceKm = haversineDistanceKm(previousLocation, 
currentLocation); 
    const travelMinutes = minutesBetween(previous.scan_time, 
current.scan_time); 
 
    if ( 
      distanceKm > DISTANCE_THRESHOLD_KM && 
      travelMinutes < MAX_TRAVEL_MINUTES 
    ) { 
      return { 
        risk: "High", 
        message: "Scan locations changed too far too quickly 
for normal usage" 
      }; 
    } 
  } 
 
  if (hasDifferentLocations && hasFarLocations && 
scans.length > SCAN_MEDIUM_RISK_COUNT) { 
    return { 
      risk: "Medium", 
      message: "Unusual repeated scan behaviour detected 
across distant locations" 
    }; 
  } 
 
  return { 
    risk: "Low", 
    message: "Product verified successfully" 
  }; 

--- PAGE 66 ---
85 
} 
Figure 4.21 Code Snippet for Clone Risk Detection Logic 
 
This logic classifies scan behaviour into Low, Medium, or High risk. High risk is 
assigned when scans occur from distant locations within an unrealistic time period or when 
excessive scans occur across distant locations within the verification window. Medium risk 
is assigned when repeated scan behaviour is detected across distant locations but does not  
reach the high-risk threshold. If scans are repeated from the same or nearby locations, the 
product remains Low risk and can still be displayed as authentic. This provides a behavioural 
warning mechanism without automatically invalidating active products. 
4.4.8 Ledger Block Integration 
A tamper -evident ledger was integrated into the system to provide an auditable 
record of critical product -related events. The ledger stores product registration, product 
verification, and product revocation as sequential hash-linked blocks. Each block contains a 
unique identifier, the previous block’s hash, its own hash, the event type, a related reference 
identifier, and a timestamp. 
async function insertLedger(type, refId, db = pool) { 
  const last = await db.query( 
    `SELECT current_hash FROM ledger_block ORDER BY block_id DESC 
LIMIT 1` 
  ); 
  const previous_hash = last.rows.length 
    ? last.rows[0].current_hash 
    : "GENESIS"; 
  const timestamp = new Date().toISOString(); 

--- PAGE 67 ---
86 
  const data = buildBlockData(type, refId, timestamp , 
previous_hash); 
  const current_hash = generateHash(data); 
  await db.query( 
    `INSERT INTO ledger_block 
     (previous_hash, current_hash, data_type, data_reference_id, 
timestamp) 
     VALUES ($1, $2, $3, $4, $5)`, 
    [previous_hash, current_hash, type, refId, timestamp] 
  ); 
} 
Figure 4.22 Code Snippet for Ledger Block Creation 
 
This function creates a new ledger block by hashing the event information together 
with the previous block’s hash. By incl uding the previous hash in the current block’s hash 
computation, the system ensures that each block is cryptographically linked to the entire 
chain.  
The ledger also supports validation by recalculating the expected hash of each stored 
block and comparing it with the recorded current_hash. At the same time, the system checks 
whether each previous_hash correctly matches the current_hash of the previous block.  
for (const block of result.rows) { 
  const expectedHash = generateHash( 
    buildBlockData( 
      block.data_type, 
      block.data_reference_id, 
      formatStoredTimestamp(block.timestamp), 
      block.previous_hash 

--- PAGE 68 ---
87 
    ) 
  ); 
  if ( 
    block.previous_hash !== previousHash || 
    block.current_hash !== expectedHash 
  ) { 
    isValid = false; 
    break; 
  } 
  previousHash = block.current_hash; 
} 
Figure 4.23 Code Snippet for Ledger Integrity Validation 
 
This validation process ensures that unauthorized modification to stored ledger 
records can be detected. If the ledger validation fails, the system flags the chain as 
compromised, indicating potential tampering or inconsistency in the recorded data. 

--- PAGE 69 ---
88 
 
Figure 4.24  Ledger Validation Output 
 
4.5 System Workflow 
The overall workflow of the system begins when a manufacturer accesses the 
registration dashboard and enters the product details. These details are submitted to the 
backend server, where the system inserts the product record into the database and generates 
a unique non-sequential QR identifier. A signed verification payload is then created using 
HMAC-SHA256 and embedded into a verification URL. This URL is converted into a QR 
code image and returned to the frontend for display and download. At the same time, a 
corresponding registration block is appended to the tamper-evident ledger.  
Once the QR code is distributed with the product, a consumer can scan it using a 
mobile device. The verification page extracts the signed payload and sends it to the backend 
verification route. The backend validates the signature before performing any database 


--- PAGE 70 ---
89 
lookup. If the payload is valid, the backend retrieves the linked product and QR record, stores 
the scan log entry, evaluates clone-risk behaviour, checks the product status, and returns the 
final verification result.  
If the product is active and no suspicious behaviour is detected, the system returns 
an authentic result. If unusual scan behaviour is detected, the product is classified as 
suspicious and the fronte nd displays a recommendation warning. If the product has been 
revoked, the backend immediately returns a revoked result, and the frontend displays a red 
high-priority warning state. If the payload is invalid or cannot be matched to a registered 
record, the system returns an invalid result.  
Manufacturers can also revoke products through the product list page. When a 
revocation request is made, the backend checks that the product is still active, updates the 
product status to revoked, disables the linked QR code, and records the revocation event in 
the ledger. Any later verification request for that QR code will therefore return a revoked 
result.  
The workflow demonstrates how the frontend, backend, database, scan logging 
module, clone detection mechanism, and tamper-evident ledger operate together to support 
end-to-end product authentication in the prototype.  

--- PAGE 71 ---
90 
 
Figure 4.25 Overall System Workflow of the Product Authentication System 
 
4.6 Discussion 
This chapter has presented the implementation of the proposed blockchain -inspired 
product authentication system and demonstrated how the system design described in Chapter 
3 was successfully translated into a functional prototype. The completed system integrates 
key features including product registration, QR code generation, signed payload protection, 
product verification, scan logging, clone -risk assessment, product revocation, analytics 
reporting, and tamper-evident ledger recording.  
The implementation demonstrates tha t blockchain -inspired mechanisms can be 
effectively applied in a controlled environment to enhance data integrity and support 
counterfeit-risk detection without requiring a fully decentralized blockchain network. By 
combining backend cryptographic validati on, behavioural scan analysis, and hash -linked 


--- PAGE 72 ---
91 
ledger traceability, the system provides a comprehensive end -to-end workflow for product 
authentication.  
Furthermore, the frontend and backend components were successfully integrated to 
support both manufactu rer operations and consumer verification. The use of clear 
verification result states improves usability by enabling users to easily distinguish between 
authentic, suspicious, revoked, and invalid products. In addition, scan logging and risk 
classification provide practical indicators for detecting potential QR code cloning.  
Overall, the implemented prototype satisfies the intended project scope and provides 
a suitable basis for system testing and evaluation. The next stage of the report therefore 
focuses on validating whether the system performs correctly according to the planned 
objectives and functional requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 