

--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology 
 
 
 
ENHANCED BLOCKCHAIN-BASED PRODUCT AUTHENTICATION 
WITH CLONE-DETECTION AND REVOCATION FEATURES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heidi NC Motiun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Computer Science with Honours 
(Software Engineering) 
2026 
  


--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
Enhanced Blockchain-Based Product Authentication with Clone-Detection 
and Revocation Features 
 
 
 
Heidi NC Motiun 
 
 
 
A thesis submitted 
In partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Bachelor of Computer Science 
with Honours 
(Software Engineering) 
 
 
 
 
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology 
UNIVERSITI MALAYSIA SARAWAK 
2021 

--- PAGE 3 ---
i 
DECLARATION 
I declare that the work in this thesis was carried out in accordance with the regulations of 
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak. E xcept where due acknowledgements have been made,  the 
work is that of the author alone. The thesis has not been accepted for any degree and is not 
concurrently submitted in candidature of any other degree. 
 
…………………………… 
Signature 
 
Name: Heidi NC Motiun 
Matric No.: 83996 
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak 
Date : 
 

--- PAGE 4 ---
ii 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to all individuals who have guided and 
supported me throughout the development of this project. I am especially grateful to my 
supervisor, Associate Professor Ts. Dr. Adnan Shahid Khan, and my examiner, Ts. Dr. Lau 
Sei Ping, for their guidance , valuable feedback, and constructive advice, which greatly 
contributed to the successful completion of this work. 
I would also like to extend my appreciation to the Final Year Project lecturer, Associate 
Professor Dr. Chiew Kang Leng, for providing insigh tful lectures and valuable knowledge 
that supported the development of this project. 
Finally, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my family and friends for their 
continuous support, encouragement, and understanding throughout the project period. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
iii 
ABSTRACT 
The widespread circulation of counterfeit products has become a significant challenge in 
modern supply chains, leading to financial losses and safety risks. Traditional authentication 
methods such as barcodes, holograms, and centralized dat abases are vulnerable to 
duplication and tampering, reducing trust in product verification. This project proposes a 
blockchain-based product authentication system that integrates QR code verification, a 
tamper-evident ledger, clone detection, and product r evocation mechanisms. Each product 
is assigned a QR code containing a secure verification token with a unique identifier and 
cryptographic integrity component. Upon scanning, the token is validated through backend 
hash-based verification to ensure authenticity and detect manipulation. The system applies 
core blockchain principles, including immutability and auditability, within a web -based 
prototype. Consumers access the system through a mobile -friendly interface, while 
manufacturers manage products  via an administrative dashboard.  To address QR code 
duplication, a rule -based clone detection mechanism analyzes scan behavior and flags 
suspicious patterns. Additionally, a revocation feature allows compromised products to be 
invalidated, with all events  recorded in the tamper -evident ledger. The results demonstrate 
that combining QR-based verification with blockchain -based principles enhances security, 
transparency, and reliability. This project provides a practical approach to improving product 
authentication while maintaining realistic implementation constraints. 
Keywords: product authentication, blockchain-based system, QR code verification, clone 
detection, tamper-evident ledger  
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
iv 
Sistem Pengesahan Produk Berasaskan Blockchain Yang Dipertingkatkan Dengan 
Mekanisme Pengesanan Klon Dan Pembatalan  
ABSTRAK 
Peredaran produk tiruan yang meluas telah menjadi cabaran utama dalam rantaian bekalan 
moden, menyebabkan kerugian kewangan dan risiko keselamatan kepada pengguna. 
Kaedah pengesahan tradisional seperti kod bar, hologram, dan pangkalan data berpusat 
adalah terdedah kepada peniruan dan manipulasi, sekali gus mengurangkan kepercayaan 
terhadap proses pengesahan produk. Projek ini mencadangkan satu sistem pengesahan 
produk berasaskan blockchain yang menginteg rasikan pengesahan kod QR, lejar kalis 
gangguan, pengesanan klon, dan mekanisme pembatalan produk. Setiap produk diberikan 
kod QR yang mengandungi token pengesahan selamat dengan pengecam unik dan komponen 
integriti kriptografi. Apabila diimbas, token ters ebut disahkan melalui pengesahan 
berasaskan hash di bahagian backend untuk memastikan ketulenan dan mengesan sebarang 
manipulasi. Sistem ini mengaplikasikan prinsip teras blockchain seperti ketakbolehubahan 
dan kebolehkesanan dalam bentuk prototaip berasas kan web. Pengguna boleh mengakses 
sistem melalui antara muka mesra mudah alih, manakala pengeluar mengurus produk 
melalui papan pemuka pentadbiran. Bagi menangani peniruan kod QR, mekanisme 
pengesanan klon berasaskan peraturan digunakan untuk menganalisis tingkah laku imbasan 
dan menandakan corak mencurigakan. Selain itu, ciri pembatalan membolehkan produk 
yang terjejas dibatalkan, dengan semua rekod disimpan dalam lejar kalis gangguan. 
Keputusan menunjukkan bahawa gabungan pengesahan kod QR dengan prinsip berasaskan 
blockchain dapat meningkatkan keselamatan, ketelusan, dan kebolehpercayaan. Projek ini 
menyediakan pendekatan praktikal untuk meningkatkan pengesahan produk dalam 
kekangan pelaksanaan sebenar. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
v 
Kata kunci: pengesahan produk, sistem berasaskan blo ckchain, pengesahan kod QR, 
pengesanan klon, lejar kalis gangguan  
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 8 ---
vi 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
DECLARATION i 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ii 
ABSTRACT iii 
ABSTRAK iv 
TABLE OF CONTENTS vi 
LIST OF TABLES xi 
LIST OF FIGURES xii 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS xiv 
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 1 
1.1 Background 1 
1.2 Problem Statement 2 
1.3 Project Description 2 
1.4 Scope 4 
1.5 Aims and Objectives 5 
1.6 Methodology 5 
1.7 Significance of Project 7 
1.8 Expected Outcome 8 

--- PAGE 9 ---
vii 
1.9 Project Outline 8 
1.10 Summary 9 
CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW 11 
2.1 Introduction 11 
2.2 Overview of Counterfeit Products 11 
2.3 Blockchain Technology 12 
2.3.1 Overview of Blockchain 12 
2.3.2 Key Characteristics of Blockchain 13 
2.3.3 Blockchain in Product Authentication 14 
2.4 QR Code Technology 15 
2.4.1 Overview of QR Codes 15 
2.4.2 QR Codes in Product Verification 15 
2.4.3 QR Code Vulnerabilities 16 
2.5 Research Gap 16 
2.6 Direction of the Proposed System 17 
2.7 Chapter Summary 19 
CHAPTER 3 REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 20 
3.1 Introduction 20 
3.2 Requirement Analysis 20 
3.2.1 Source of Requirements 21 

--- PAGE 10 ---
viii 
3.2.2 Functional Requirements 22 
3.2.3 Non-Functional Requirements 22 
3.3 System Design 23 
3.3.1 System Overview 24 
3.3.2 System Architecture 25 
3.3.3 Data Flow Diagram (Level 0) 26 
3.3.4 Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) 26 
3.3.5 Use Case Diagram 27 
3.3.6 Activity Diagram 33 
3.3.7 Sequence Diagram 35 
3.3.8 Tamper-Evident Ledger Design 38 
3.3.9 QR Code Security Design and Threat Assumptions 40 
3.3.10 Clone Detection Design 42 
3.3.11 Revocation Mechanism Design 46 
3.3.12 API Design and Endpoints 48 
3.3.13 User Interface Design 50 
3.4 Summary 56 
CHAPTER 4 IMPLEMENTATION 58 
4.1 Introduction 58 
4.2 System Requirements 58 

--- PAGE 11 ---
ix 
4.2.1 Hardware Requirement 58 
4.2.2 Software Requirements 59 
4.3 System Development 60 
4.3.1 Installation and Configuration 60 
4.4 System Implementation 61 
4.4.1 Backend Implementation 61 
4.4.2 Database Implementation 65 
4.4.3 Frontend Implementation 66 
4.4.4 Graphical User Interface (GUI) 69 
4.4.5 QR Code Security Implementation 72 
4.4.6 Product Verification Module 75 
4.4.7 Scan Tracking and Risk Detection 78 
4.4.8 Ledger Block Integration 81 
4.5 System Workflow 84 
4.6 Discussion 86 
CHAPTER 5 TESTING 88 
5.1 Introduction 88 
5.2 Software Testing 88 
5.2.1 Functionality Test 89 
5.2.2 Usability Testing 93 

--- PAGE 12 ---
x 
5.3 Summary 95 
CHAPTER 6 CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 96 
6.1 Introduction 96 
6.2 Achievements of Objectives 96 
6.3 Contribution 97 
6.4 Limitations 98 
6.5 Future Works 99 
6.6 Conclusion 100 
REFERENCES 102 
 

--- PAGE 13 ---
xi 
LIST OF TABLES 
  Page 
Table 3.1  Use Case for Register Product 29 
Table 3.2 Use Case for Generate QR Code 29 
Table 3.3 Use Case for Revoke Product 30 
Table 3.4 Use Case for View Product Status 30 
Table 3.5 Use Case for View Scan Logs 31 
Table 3.6 Use Case for Scan QR Code 31 
Table 3.7 Use Case for Verify Product Authenticity 32 
Table 3.8 Use Case for Check Revocation Status 32 
Table 3.9 Use Case for View Product Information 33 
Table 3.10 Use Case for Receive Revocation Alert 33 
Table 3.11 Ledger Block Structure 39 
Table 3.12 List of API Core Endpoints 49 
Table 5.1  Functionality Test Cases 90 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
xii 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Page 
Figure 1.1 Waterfall Moder (Rajkumar, 2016) 6 
Figure 2.1 Working of Blockchain (Wasnik et at., 2022) 12 
Figure 3.1 System Architecture of the Product Authentication System 25 
Figure 3.2 Data Flow Diagram (Level 0) of the Product Authentication System 26 
Figure 3.3 Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) for Product Authentication System 27 
Figure 3.4 Use Case Diagram of the Product Authentication System 28 
Figure 3.5 Activity Diagram of the Consumer Product Verification Process 34 
Figure 3.6 Sequence Diagram for Product Registration 36 
Figure 3.7 Sequence Diagram for Product Verification 37 
Figure 3.8 Sequence Diagram for Product Revocation 38 
Figure 3.9 Manufacturer Administrative Dashboard Interface 50 
Figure 3.10 Manufacturer Analytics Dashboard Interface 51 
Figure 3.11 Manufacturer Revocation History Interface 52 
Figure 3.12 Consumer Scanning Module 53 
Figure 3.13 Verification Result (Authentic Result) 54 
Figure 3.14 Verification Result (Suspicious/Cloned Warning) 55 
Figure 3.15 Verification Result (Revoked or Invalid Status) 56 
Figure 4.1 Code Snippet for Product Registration Route 62 
Figure 4.2 Code Snippet for Product Revocation Route 65 
Figure 4.3 Implemented Database Table in pgAdmin 66 
Figure 4.4 Admin Login Interface 67 
Figure 4.5 Manufacturer Dashboard Interface 67 
Figure 4.6  Product List Interface 68 

--- PAGE 15 ---
xiii 
Figure 4.7 Analytics Dashboard 68 
Figure 4.8 Revocation History Interface 69 
Figure 4.9 Consumer Scanning Module 70 
Figure 4.10 Authentic Product Verification Interface 70 
Figure 4.11  Suspicious Product Verification Interface 71 
Figure 4.12 Revoked Product Verification Interface 71 
Figure 4.13  Invalid Product Verification Interface 72 
Figure 4.14 Code Snippet for HMAC Signature Generation 73 
Figure 4.15 Code Snippet for Signed QR Payload Validation 75 
Figure 4.16  Generated QR Code with Signed Verification Payload 75 
Figure 4.17 Code Snippet for Verification Request Processing 77 
Figure 4.18 Code Snippet for Verification Response Logic 78 
Figure 4.19 Code Snippet for Scan Log Recording 79 
Figure 4.20 Code Snippet for Clone Risk Detection Logic 81 
Figure 4.21 Code Snippet for Ledger Block Creation 82 
Figure 4.22 Code Snippet for Ledger Integrity Validation 83 
Figure 4.23  Ledger Validation Output 84 
Figure 4.24 Overall System Workflow of the Product Authentication System 86 
 

--- PAGE 16 ---
xiv 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
QR Quick Response 
ID Identification 
SDLC System Development Life Cycle 
URL Uniform Resource Locator 
ERD Entity Relationship Diagram 
UC Use Case 
HMAC Hash-based Message Authentication Code 
SHA Secure Hash Algorithm 
REST Representational State Transfer 
RESTful REST-based (REST architectural style) 
API Application Programming Interface 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
1 
CHAPTER 1  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Background 
In recent years, counterfeit and imitation products have become a serious issue in 
many industries such as pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and electronics (Wasnik et al., 2022). 
These fake products not only harm consumers but also affect the reputation and revenue of 
genuine manufacturers (Nagar et al., 2023). Consumers often have no easy way to check 
whether a product they purchased is original or fake. 
Existing verification methods such as barcodes, holograms, and centralized online 
databases are still vulnerable because they can be easily copied or tampered with (M 
Mallegowda et al., 2022). This situation highlights the need for a more secure and transparent 
solution to verify product authenticity and prevent counterfeiting. 
Blockchain techn ology has been widely studied as a potential solution to these 
challenges due to its ability to support tamper-evident and traceable record keeping through 
cryptographic techniques and linked data structures. By linking each record to a previous 
entry, blockchain-based systems make unauthorized modification of stored data significantly 
more difficult. When combined with QR code –based product identification, blockchain 
inspired mechanisms can support the assignment of a unique digital identity to each product, 
which consumers can verify through a simple scan (Nagar et al., 2023). 
This project aims to develop an enhanced blockchain -based product authentication 
system with additional clone detection and revocation features. The clone detection 
mechanism supports the identification of potentially duplicated or reused QR codes, while 

--- PAGE 18 ---
2 
the revocation feature enables manufacturers to invalidate products that are confirmed to be 
counterfeit or recalled. These mechanisms aim to improve consumer trust and support 
manufacturers in managing product authenticity more effectively. 
1.2 Problem Statement  
The issue of counterfeit products continues to grow, affecting both consumers and 
legitimate businesses. Many fake products look almost identical to the original ones, making 
it difficult for customers to tell the difference. These counterfeits can cause safety risks, 
financial losses, and damage to the reputation of trusted brands. 
Most existing verification methods such as barcodes, QR codes, or holograms rely 
on centralized databases or visual elements that can be easily copied or manipulated. Once 
a QR code from an authentic product is cloned and reused on a fake product, the system may 
still recognize it as genuine because it cannot detect repeated or abnormal scans. This creates 
a major weakness for counterfeiters (Shankar & Jayavadivel, 2019). 
Therefore, there is a need for a secure and tamper -evident product authentication 
system that not only verifies product legitimacy but also supports the detection of cloned 
identifiers and the revocation of compromised products. By applying blockchain principles 
for data integrity and auditability, product records can be protected against unauthorized 
modification while enabling transparent verification for both manufacturers and consumers. 
1.3 Project Description  
This project aims to develop a blockchain -based product authentication system that 
verifies product authenticity and supports the detection of counterfeit items through QR code 
scanning. In this context, the term blockchain -based refers to the application of blockchain  

--- PAGE 19 ---
3 
principles such as cryptographic hash chaining, immutability, and append -only record 
keeping, rather than the deployment of a fully decentralized blockchain network. 
The system introduces two key security mechanisms. The first is clone detection, 
which analyzes repeated QR code scan activities to identify potential misuse or duplication 
of product identifiers. The clone detection mechanism is intentionally designed as a heuristic 
risk indicator rather than a deterministic counterfeit classifier, acknowledging that absolute 
counterfeit confirmation cannot be reliably inferred from scan behaviour alone. This 
approach reflects real-world anti-counterfeit systems, where behavioural anomalies are used 
to support investigatio n and decision -making rather than enforce automatic blocking. The 
second mechanism is product revocation, which enables manufacturers to invalidate 
products that have been confirmed as counterfeit, compromised, or recalled. 
Each product is registered by th e manufacturer and assigned a unique QR code. 
Rather than storing plaintext product details directly, the QR code encodes a 
cryptographically protected verification payload that references registered product 
information maintained in the backend system, such as the product identifier, batch number, 
and manufacturing date. Product -related events, including registration, verification, and 
revocation, are recorded in a tamper -evident ledger that applies blockchain principles to 
ensure that once recorded, entries cannot be altered or removed without detection. 
Consumers verify product authenticity by scanning the QR code using a web -based 
application designed for mobile device access. During verification, the system evaluates the 
product’s registration status, scan history, and revocation state. When abnormal scan patterns 
are detected, the system provides a warning indicating potential clone risk rather than making 
a definitive counterfeit determination. Manufacturers can review scan records and perform 

--- PAGE 20 ---
4 
revocation actions when necessary, with all revocation events permanently recorded to 
maintain transparency and traceability. 
This project does not aim to implement a fully decentralized blockchain network or 
distributed consensus mechanism. Instead, it applies co re blockchain principles, namely 
cryptographic hash chaining, immutability, and append -only record keeping, to construct a 
blockchain-inspired tamper-evident ledger suitable for controlled environments and proof 
of-concept development. The focus of this pr oject is therefore on end -to-end product 
authentication workflow robustness, rather than on decentralization performance or public 
blockchain deployment. 
1.4 Scope  
This project focuses on the development of a web -based prototype for product 
authentication usi ng blockchain principles. The system supports two primary user roles, 
manufacturers and consumers. Manufacturers are responsible for registering products, 
generating QR codes, and revoking products that are identified as invalid or compromised. 
Consumers are able to verify product authenticity by scanning QR codes using a mobile-first 
web interface accessed through a smartphone browser.  
The scope of the project is limited to demonstrating core functionalities, including 
product registration, QR code generation, authenticity verification, scan logging, clone risk 
detection, and product revocation. The system operates within a controlled environment and 
serves as a proof of concept to demonstrate how blockchain-inspired ledger mechanisms can 
enhance data integrity and support counterfeit detection. The consumer-facing verification 4 
module is implemented as a mobile-first web application utilizing the device camera for QR 
scanning. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
5 
System evaluation focuses on functional correctness, data integrity assurance, and 
behavioural risk analysis rather than large -scale deployment performance or throughput 
optimisation. Implementation of decentralized consensus mechanisms or multi -node 
blockchain networks is beyond the scope of this project. 
1.5 Aims and Objectives 
The aim  of the project is to design and develop a blockchain -based system that 
enhances product authenticity verification by integrating clone detection and product 
revocation features for counterfeit prevention and consumer trust assurance. To achieve this 
aim, the project focuses on several key objectives:   
i. To design a secure system for registering and verifying product information 
using unique QR codes.  
ii. To implement clone detection and product revocation mechanisms to identify 
and manage counterfeit risks. 
iii. To develop a web -based prototype that integrates QR code generation, a 
tamper evident ledger based on blockchain principles, and a product 
verification interface. 
1.6 Methodology  
This project adopts the System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) approach using the 
Waterfall Model. The Waterfall Model is selected because it offers a clear and structured 
development process where each phase must be completed before moving to the next. This 
5 model is suitable for this project since the system requirements are well -defined and the 

--- PAGE 22 ---
6 
development process can follow a step -by-step sequence that aligns with the Final Year 
Project timeline. 
 
Figure 1.1 Waterfall Moder (Rajkumar, 2016) 
The project begins with the requirement analysis phase, which includes identifying 
the system’s main functions, limitations, and goals through a review of existing studies on 
blockchain-based product authentication systems. The next phase, system design, focuses on 
defining the system architecture, database structure, and data flow. This includes specifying 
how system components such as the tamper-evident ledger, QR code generation mechanism, 
product verification process, and clone detection logic interact to support secure and reliable 
authentication. 
During the development phase, a functional prototype is implemented based on the 
approved system design. Web-based technologies are used to develop the user interface and 
backend services, integrating product registration, verification, clone detect ion, and  
revocation functionalities. Blockchain principles are applied through a ledger mechanism to 


--- PAGE 23 ---
7 
ensure that critical system events are recorded in an immutable and auditable manner. Once 
the system is developed, the testing phase will be conducted to ensure that all functions work 
as intended and that the system can effectively detect and revoke counterfeit products. 
Finally, a maintenance and documentation phase will take place to address any 
issues, refine the system, and record the overall process for future improvements. 
1.7 Significance of Project 
This project provides several important benefits for consumers, manufacturers, and 
the wider academic and industry communities. For consumers, the system enables instant 
verification of product authenticity through QR code scanning, helping to improve trust and 
reduce the risk of purchasing counterfeit products. For manufacturers, the system offers a 
secure and transparent mechanism to monitor product verification activities, detect potential 
cloning behaviour, and revoke compromised or recalled products. By applying blockchain 
principles through a tamper -evident ledger, together with clone detection and revocation 
mechanisms, the system enhances data integrity, accountability, and traceability within the 
product authentication process. This design supports reliable record -keeping while 
remaining practical for controlled implementation environments. From an academic 
perspective, the project demonstrates how blockchain principles can be applied beyond 
cryptocurrency applications, particularly in the context of product authentication and anti -
counterfeiting systems. The proposed framework also provides a foundation for future 
enhancement, such as integration with more advanced ledger infrastructures or extended  
deployment scenarios, while maintaining the core focus on data integrity and verification 
reliability.  

--- PAGE 24 ---
8 
1.8 Expected Outcome 
By the end of the project, a functional web -based prototype is expected to be 
completed, demonstrating the application of blockchain princ iples for product 
authentication. Each registered product will be assigned a unique QR code that is linked to 
a tamper-evident ledger entry, enabling secure and traceable product verification. Consumers 
will be able to scan the QR code using a dedicated ve rification module to check the 
authenticity status of a product. The system is expected to incorporate clone detection to 
identify suspicious patterns of repeated or abnormal QR code scans. In addition, a product 
revocation mechanism will be implemented, a llowing manufacturers to invalidate products 
that are confirmed to be compromised, counterfeit, or recalled. All significant system events, 
including registration, verification, and revocation actions, will be recorded to maintain 
transparency and data int egrity. Both manufacturers and consumers will interact with the 
system through a user -friendly, mobile-first web interface. Finally, an evaluation of the 
prototype will demonstrate how the application of blockchain principles can enhance product 
traceability, strengthen authenticity verification, and support counterfeit prevention within a 
controlled implementation environment.  
1.9 Project Outline 
This report consists of six chapters that describe the development of a  blockchain-
based product authentication system with clone-detection and revocation features. 
Chapter 1: Introduction  provides an overview of the project, including the 
background, problem statement, objectives, scope, and overall project description.  

--- PAGE 25 ---
9 
Chapter 2: Background Study / Literature Revie w discusses related studies and 
research on blockchain technology, product authentication systems, and existing methods 
for counterfeit prevention.  
Chapter 3: Requirement Analysis and Design present the system requirements and 
design, including the archit ecture, workflow, and main components such as QR code 
generation, clone detection, and revocation features. 
Chapter 4: Implementation  describes the system implementation process, 
including the development of the prototype, key modules, and integration of s ystem 
components. 
Chapter 5: Testing presents the testing activities conducted on the system, including 
functionality and usability testing. It evaluates the system’s performance, reliability, and 
overall effectiveness. 
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Future Work summarize the overall project outcomes, 
highlights key contributions, discusses limitations, and provides recommendations for future 
improvements and enhancements. 
1.10 Summary 
This chapter has presented the background, problem statement, objectives, and scope 
of the project, emphasizing the growing issue of counterfeit products across various 
industries. To address this issue, the project proposes a blockchain -based product 
authentication system that integrates QR code verific ation, clone detection, and product 
revocation mechanisms. By applying blockchain principles to create a tamper-evident ledger 
for recording critical product events, the system aims to strengthen data integrity, enhance 

--- PAGE 26 ---
10 
consumer trust, and assist manufacturers in managing product authenticity. The chapter also 
outlined the brief methodology and expected outcomes, establishing a clear foundation for 
the system development process discussed in the next chapter.

--- PAGE 27 ---
11 
CHAPTER 2  
 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1 Introduction  
This chapter provides an overview of the key concepts and technologies related to 
the development of a blockchain -based product authentication system. It begins with a 
discussion on the growing issue of counterfeit products and how they impact consumers and 
industries. The chapter then explains the fundamentals of blockchain and QR code 
technology, focusing on how these technologies are used in authentication. By reviewing 
existing works and identifying their limitations, this chapter highlights the research gap that 
motivates the proposed system. The chapter concludes with a summary of the main findings.  
2.2 Overview of Counterfeit Products 
Counterfeit products have emerged as a significant concern across various industries, 
including pharmaceuticals, cosmetic s, electronics, and consumer goods. These fake items 
closely resemble genuine products, making it challenging for consumers to distinguish 
between authentic and counterfeit goods. Counterfeits create serious safety risk that lead to 
financial losses and negative impact for consumer trust in brands (Shankar & Jayavadivel, 
2019). Traditional authentication methods such as QR code, barcodes, holograms, and serial 
numbers are increasingly proving to be ineffective, as they can be easily copied or 
manipulated. Counterfeiters frequently duplicate QR codes or reuse legitimate identifiers, 
allowing counterfeit products to pass basic verification processes. As counterfeiters become 
more sophisticated, there is an urgent need for more secure, transparent, and resilien t 
authentication systems to combat this growing threat. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
12 
2.3 Blockchain Technology 
This section reviews blockchain technology, its key characteristics, and its 
application in product authentication systems. 
2.3.1 Overview of Blockchain 
Blockchain is a distributed dig ital ledger technology that records data in blocks 
linked using cryptographic hashes. Each block contains a timestamp and a reference to the 
previous block, forming a chain that is resistant to tampering. In general, blockchain systems 
distribute data acro ss multiple nodes, reducing reliance on a single controlling entity and 
improving transparency and data integrity. These properties make blockchain suitable for 
applications requiring trustworthy record -keeping, such as supply chain management and 
product authentication.  
 
Figure 2.1 Working of Blockchain (Wasnik et at., 2022) 
 


--- PAGE 29 ---
13 
2.3.2 Key Characteristics of Blockchain 
Blockchain technology has several key characteristics that make it suitable for secure 
product authentication and counterfeit prevention. These characteristics ensure that product 
data stored on the blockchain remains protected, trustworthy, and resistant to manipulation. 
Security is one of the features of blockchain. It uses cryptographic techniques th at 
protect data stored on the blockchain. Each transaction is digitally signed, and the consensus 
mechanism ensures that only valid data is added to the chain. This makes unauthorized 
changes extremely difficult, providing a more secure alternative to cent ralized databases 
(Wasnik et al., 2022).  
Decentralization further strengthens system reliability. Instead of relying on a single 
central server, data is stored across multiple nodes in a distributed network. This eliminates 
the single point of failure iss ue found in centralized systems and makes it much more 
difficult for attackers to alter product information (Mallegowda et al., 2022; Wasnik et al., 
2022).  
Immutability ensures that once data is recorded on the blockchain, it cannot be edited 
or deleted without changing the entire chain. Each block is linked to the previous one using 
cryptographic hashes, creating a structure that is resistant to tampering. This is especially 
important for product authentication because it guarantees that product records, once added, 
cannot be modified by counterfeiters (Wasnik et al., 2022).  
Transparency is another characteristic that enhances trust. Although the data stored 
on a blockchain can be secured or anonymized, the transactions recorded on the network are 

--- PAGE 30 ---
14 
visible to all participants. This transparency allows consumers and manufacturers to verify 
the authenticity and history of a product at any time (Nagar et al., 2023; Wasnik et al., 2022).  
Lastly, traceability is a key feature enabled by blockchain technology, a llowing the 
recording of a product’s movement or status at various stages of the supply chain. Each 
transaction or update is stored as a permanent, verifiable entry, making it possible to track a 
product from origin to end -user (Wasnik et al., 2022). This transparency helps prevent 
tampering, supports authenticity verification, and enhances trust among stakeholders. 
Although not all blockchain systems fully implement comprehensive traceability features, 
the ability to maintain an immutable record of a produ ct’s journey remains one of 
blockchain’s strongest advantages in product authentication and supply chain management.  
These characteristics collectively make blockchain a strong foundation for building 
a secure and reliable product authentication system, a ddressing many weaknesses found in 
traditional verification methods and centralized solutions. 
2.3.3 Blockchain in Product Authentication 
Blockchain is increasingly used to store product information securely so that it 
cannot be changed or deleted. By recording each product’s identity on a blockchain, 
manufacturers create a permanent, verifiable history. Consumers can confirm authenticity 
by checking whether the product information scanned from a QR code matches the 
blockchain record.  
However, many existing bloc kchain-based systems only focus on tracking product 
movement or supply chain traceability. They do not address key issues such as detecting 
cloned QR codes or revoking compromised products, leaving gaps in consumer protection. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
15 
2.4 QR Code Technology 
This section discusses QR code technology, its use in product verification, and its 
inherent vulnerabilities.  
2.4.1 Overview of QR Codes 
QR codes, or Quick Response codes, are two-dimensional matrix barcodes designed 
to store information that can be quickly retrieved using a smartphone camera or QR scanner. 
Compared to traditional barcodes, QR codes can store much more data, including product 
identifiers, URLs, manufacturing details, and batch numbers. Their ability to be scanned 
easily and read from any angl e makes them popular in retail, logistics, marketing, and 
product authentication. QR codes have become one of the most practical tools for connecting 
physical products to digital information because they are inexpensive to generate and require 
no specialized hardware for scanning (Tiwari et al., 2023). 
2.4.2 QR Codes in Product Verification 
QR codes are widely used in product verification systems due to their simplicity and 
accessibility. When a consumer scans a QR code found on product packaging, the system 
typically retrieves information such as the product name, batch number, manufacturing date, 
and authenticity status. QR -based systems help bridge the gap between manufacturers and 
consumers by allowing instant access to product details through mobile devices. Many 
industries, including pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, and electronics, use QR codes to support 
transparency and improve customer trust by offering quick authenticity checks. Studies show 
that QR-based verification is currently one of the most common  approaches in counterfeit 
detection systems because it is easy to implement and widely supported by existing devices 
(Kulkarni et al., 2025; Tiwari et al., 2023). 

--- PAGE 32 ---
16 
2.4.3 QR Code Vulnerabilities 
Despite their advantages, QR codes have notable security limitations. QR c odes are 
static images with no built-in protection against duplication. Counterfeiters can easily copy 
a QR code from a genuine product, either by photographing it or reprinting it and place it on 
fake items. When scanned, the code often leads to the same verification result as the original 
product, making it difficult for consumers or systems to detect the counterfeit. Most existing 
QR-based authentication systems only check whether the code exists in a database and do 
not monitor scan patterns, locations,  or scan frequency, which makes them vulnerable to 
cloning attacks (Kulkarni et al., 2025; Tiwari et al., 2023). This weakness highlights the need 
for additional layers of security, such as blockchain integration and clone -detection 
mechanisms, to ensure reliable product authentication. 
2.5 Research Gap 
Despite the advancements in product authentication technologies, several critical 
gaps remain in current research and implementations. Most existing solutions primarily 
focus on traceability and basic verification, often overlooking advanced threats such as QR 
code duplication or cloning. This makes many systems vulnerable to sophisticated 
counterfeiting techniques, where genuine product codes are simply copied and reused, as 
highlighted in the work of Shankar and Jayavadivel (2019) and Wasnik et al. (2022).  
Although blockchain technology provides transparency and tamper-resistance, many 
blockchain-based authentication models do not incorporate real -time clone detection 
mechanisms, as noted by Mallegowda et al. (2022) and Nagar et al. (2023). Existing studies 
also show that once a product is recorded on the blockchain, most systems lack a method to 
revoke, deactivate, or flag the item if it is later found to be fake, recalled, or compromised 

--- PAGE 33 ---
17 
(Tiwari et al., 2023; Nagar et al., 2023). Without a revocation feature, counterfeit products 
with duplicated QR codes may continue to appear “authentic” during verification, which 
reduces the reliability of these systems.  
Furthermore, the study by Kulkarni et al. (2025) demonstrates that while blockchain 
can enhance product traceability, QR codes used in these systems remain vulnerable because 
counterfeiters can easily copy and reuse legitimate QR codes. Their blockchain based model 
does not include clone detection or mechanis ms to invalidate compromised identifiers, 
indicating that counterfeiting risks persist despite improved traceability.  
Another challenge is the limited consumer-centered design in current authentication 
platforms. Many solutions prioritize backend processes, such as ledger updates and product 
traceability, but provide minimal or unclear feedback to users regarding authenticity, risk 
levels, or revocation status (Shankar & Jayavadivel, 2019; Wasnik et al., 2022). This leads 
to poor user confidence and reduces the effectiveness of verification systems in real purchase 
environments.  
Addressing these gaps requires a comprehensive solution that not only ensures secure 
and immutable records through blockchain technology but also incorporates real-time clone 
detection, dynamic revocation, and a user -friendly interface. A solution like this would  
greatly increase consumer trust in contemporary supply chains and reinforce product 
authenticity.        
2.6 Direction of the Proposed System 
The proposed system aims to provid e a more secure and user -friendly approach for 
product authenticity verification by integrating QR code verification with a blockchain -

--- PAGE 34 ---
18 
inspired tamper-evident ledger, clone detection, and product revocation mechanisms. The 
system is designed to address com mon weaknesses found in existing QR code -based and 
centralized authentication solutions.  
Conventional QR-based systems are widely adopted due to their simplicity and low 
cost. However, QR codes are inherently static and easily duplicated. Centralized data bases 
further introduce risks such as unauthorized modification, single points of failure, and 
limited auditability. While blockchain technology offers immutability and transparency, 
many existing blockchain-based authentication systems primarily focus on traceability and 
do not adequately address QR code cloning or post-registration product revocation.  
To overcome these limitations, the proposed system incorporates a backend -driven 
clone detection mechanism that analyzes QR code scan history, including sc an frequency 
and contextual patterns. This enables the system to identify abnormal usage, such as repeated 
scans of the same QR code within short time intervals or from geographically inconsistent 
locations, which may indicate potential counterfeiting. Det ected anomalies are logged and 
made available to manufacturers for further assessment.  
In addition, the system provides a controlled product revocation mechanism that 
allows authorized manufacturers to invalidate products that are recalled, compromised, o r 
confirmed to be counterfeit. Revocation events are recorded in a tamper -evident ledger to 
ensure accountability and auditability, while consumers are clearly informed of the current 
product status during verification.  
Rather than implementing a fully de centralized blockchain network, the system 
adopts a blockchain simulation approach to demonstrate immutability and tamper resistance 
in a lightweight and practical manner suitable for a proof -of-concept prototype. The 

--- PAGE 35 ---
19 
verification process is delivered through a mobile-first web interface, ensuring accessibility 
for consumers without requiring specialized hardware or native applications.  
Overall, the proposed system seeks to enhance product authentication by combining 
practical QR code verification with bac kend validation, behavioral analysis, and tamper -
evident record keeping, thereby improving trust, transparency, and resilience against 
counterfeiting. 
2.7 Chapter Summary 
This chapter reviewed key technologies and approaches used in product 
authentication, highlighting both the strengths and limitations of existing solutions. While 
QR codes and blockchain technologies have enhanced verification capabilities, significant 
gaps remain, particularly in the detection of cloned QR codes and the management of 
revoked or compromised products. These identified limitations provide the motivation for 
the proposed system design, which will be discussed in the following chapter. The chapter 
also outlined the direction of the proposed system, which integrates blockchain princ iples 
with clone detection and product revocation mechanisms to address these shortcomings.  

--- PAGE 36 ---
20 
CHAPTER 3  
 
 
REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS AND DESIGN 
3.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the requirement analysis and system design for the proposed 
product authentication system. The purpose of this chapter is to identify the functional and 
non-functional requirements of the system and to explain how the system is design ed to 
fulfill these requirements.  
The system requirements were derived from multiple sources, including the literature 
review discussed in Chapter 2 and an analysis of existing product authentication solutions. 
These requirements are categorized into functional and non -functional requireme nts to 
clearly define the system’s expected behaviour, performance, and constraints.  
In addition, this chapter describes the overall system design, including system 
overview, system architecture, data flow diagram, use case interactions, activity flows, 
sequence diagrams, and user interface structure. The proposed design emphasizes secure 
product verification, effective detection of cloned QR codes, and controlled product 
revocation, while maintaining usability for both manufacturers and consumers. 
3.2 Requirement Analysis 
Requirement analysis is an important phase in system development as it defines what 
the system should do and how it should perform. This section explains how the system 
requirements were gathered and presents both functional and non -functional requirements 
for the proposed system. 

--- PAGE 37 ---
21 
3.2.1 Source of Requirements 
The requirements for this project were obtained through several sources:  
1. Literature Review  
Existing studies on blockchain -based product authentication, QR code 
verification, and counterfeit detection were reviewed in Chapter 2. These studies 
helped identify common system features, limitations, and research gaps, such as 
the absence of clone detection and revocation mechanisms.  
2. Analysis of Existing Systems  
Observations of current QR -based and  centralized authentication systems 
highlighted weaknesses such as QR code duplication, lack of real -time 
monitoring, and absence of product revocation features. These weaknesses 
guided the formulation of system requirements.  
3. Stakeholder-Oriented Requirement Considerations  
System requirements were derived from inferred stakeholder needs based on 
typical product authentication workflows. Manufacturers require the ability to 
register products, monitor scan activities, detect abnormal usage patterns, and 
revoke products when necessary due to recalls or counterfeit detection. 
Consumers require a fast, simple, and trustworthy verification process using a 
mobile device, which influenced the adoption of a mobile-first web interface and 
a minimal-interaction verification workflow. Retail and post-purchase scenarios, 
where legitimate repeated scans may occur, were also considered. These 
considerations informed the verification workflow, scan logging, clone detection 
logic, and user feedback mechanisms. 

--- PAGE 38 ---
22 
3.2.2 Functional Requirements 
Functional requirements define the core functions that the system must perform. The 
functional requirements for the proposed system are as follows:  
1. The system shall allow manufacturers to register products into the system.  
2. The system shall generate a unique QR code for each registered product.  
3. The system shall store product information in a blockchain-based ledger.  
4. The system shall allow consumers to verify product authenticity by scanning a QR 
code.  
5. The system shall record each QR code scan for monitoring purposes.  
6. The system shall detect possible cloned QR codes based on repeated or abnormal 
scan activity.  
7. The system shall allow manufacturers to revoke products that are fake, recalled, or 
compromised.  
8. The system shall display verificatio n results to consumers, including authenticity 
status and revocation warnings. 
3.2.3 Non-Functional Requirements 
Non-functional requirements describe the quality attributes and performance 
expectations of the system.  
 Performance  
The system shall return verification results within 2 -3 seconds after a QR 
code scan under normal operating conditions.  
 
 

--- PAGE 39 ---
23 
 Security  
Product authentication data shall be protected from unauthorized 
modification using tamper -resistant properties inspired by  blockchain 
principles, ensuring the integrity of stored records.  
 Usability  
The system interface shall provide a mobile-first web interface that is simple 
and intuitive for both manufacturers and consumers.  
 Reliability  
The system shall operate consiste ntly during repeated QR code scans and 
verification request, with basic error handling to ensure continued operation 
when invalid or revoked products are scanned. 
 Maintainability  
The system shall be designed using modular architecture, separating core 
components to facilitate future updates and feature enhancements. 
3.3 System Design 
This section describes the design of the proposed QR code -based product 
authentication system. The system is designed to meet the identified requirements and 
support secure product verification. It explains how the main components of the system work 
together to enable QR code scanning, authenticity checking, clone detection, and product 
revocation using blockchain technology. 

--- PAGE 40 ---
24 
3.3.1 System Overview 
This section provides an overview of the proposed product authentication system and 
explains how the main components interact to achieve secure product verification. The 
system is designed to help manufacturers and consumers verify product authenticity using 
QR codes combined with blockchain technology.  
The system involves two main user roles, manufacturers and consumers. 
Manufacturers are responsible for registering products into the system, generating unique 
QR codes, and managing product status, including revoking products that are recalled o r 
identified as counterfeit. Consumers interact with the system by scanning QR codes on 
products to verify their authenticity.  
When a product is registered, its associated information is recorded in a blockchain-
based tamper-evident ledger to ensure data integrity and prevent unauthorized modification. 
Each product is assigned a unique QR code that links to its corresponding backend 
verification record. During the verification process, the system validates the scanned QR 
code against stored records and monitors scan behaviour for abnormal patterns.  
To enhance security, the system incorporates a clone detection mechanism that 
analyses repeated scans of the same QR code across different locations or timeframes. When 
suspicious behaviour is detected, the syst em flags the product for further investigation. In 
addition, a revocation mechanism allows manufacturers to deactivate compromised 
products, ensuring that consumers receive accurate and up-to-date verification results. 

--- PAGE 41 ---
25 
Overall, the proposed system aims to provide a secure, transparent, and user-friendly 
solution for product authentication, addressing key weaknesses in existing QR -based and 
centralized verification systems. 
3.3.2 System Architecture 
The overall system architecture of the proposed product authentication system is 
shown in Figure 3.1.  
 
Figure 3.1 System Architecture of the Product Authentication System 
 
Figure 3.1 illustrates the system architecture, which follows a layered design 
consisting of the client, application, and data layers. Consumers interact with the system 
through a mobile -first web application to verify products by scanning QR codes, while 
manufacturers use an administrativ e dashboard to register products, revoke product status, 
and review system alerts. All requests are processed by the backend application layer, where 
authentication, QR integrity validation, clone detection, and ledger management are handled 
by dedicated m odules. Operational data is stored in a relational database, while critical 


--- PAGE 42 ---
26 
events such as product registration, verification, and revocation are recorded in a tamper -
evident ledger to ensure data integrity and auditability. 
3.3.3 Data Flow Diagram (Level 0) 
Figure 3.2 illustrates the Level 0 Data Flow Diagram of the Product Authentication 
System, providing a high -level view of the system boundary and its interactions with 
external entities. The diagram shows how consumers and manufacturers exchange data with 
the system for product verification, registration, and revocation, while internal data stores 
support scan logging, risk classification, and auditability. 
 
Figure 3.2 Data Flow Diagram (Level 0) of the Product Authentication System 
 
3.3.4 Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) 
Figure 3.3 illustrates the core data structures supporting the proposed product 
authentication system. Manufacturers register products, each of which is assigned a unique 
QR code. Scan events are rec orded to support verification and clone detection. The ledger 
structure is used to store tamper -evident records of product registration, scan activity, and 
revocation events, ensuring auditability and data integrity across the system.  


--- PAGE 43 ---
27 
 
Figure 3.3 Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) for Product Authentication System 
 
3.3.5 Use Case Diagram 
The system involves two primary actors, the Manufacturer and the Consumer. 
Figure 3.4 illustrates the main interaction between users and the system. 


--- PAGE 44 ---
28 
 
Figure 3.4 Use Case Diagram of the Product Authentication System 
 
Manufacturers Use Case Descriptions 
The Manufacturer is responsible for managing product information and maintaining 
product authenticity within the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 45 ---
29 
Table 3.1  Use Case for Register Product 
Use Case ID UC-01  
Use Case Name Register Product 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Allows the manufacturer to enter product details into the system. 
Upon successful submission, the product information is recorded as 
an immutable event in the tamper-evident ledger. 
Pre-Condition The manufacturer is logged into the system dashboard. 
Post-Condition Product is registered and ready for QR code generation. 
Includes UC-02: Generate QR Code 
 
Table 3.2 Use Case for Generate QR Code 
Use Case ID UC-02  
Use Case Name Generate QR Code 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  The system generates a unique QR code linked to the registered 
product’s ledger record. 
Pre-Condition The system has successfully validated the registration data from 
UC-01. 
Post-Condition QR code is issued and stored in the database. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 46 ---
30 
Table 3.3 Use Case for Revoke Product 
Use Case ID UC-03  
Use Case Name Revoke Product 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Enables the manufacturer to deactivate or recall products that are 
confirmed to be counterfeit or compromised. 
Pre-Condition The product exists in the system and is currently marked as 
"Active". 
Post-Condition Revocation event is recorded in the tamper -evident ledger and 
product status is updated. 
 
Table 3.4 Use Case for View Product Status 
Use Case ID UC-04  
Use Case Name View Product Status 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Allows the manufacturer to view the current status of registered 
products to see which items are active, pending, or revoked. 
Pre-Condition The manufacturer has registered products in the system. 
Post-Condition The manufacturer identifies the current operational state of specific 
product units or batches. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 47 ---
31 
Table 3.5 Use Case for View Scan Logs 
Use Case ID UC-05  
Use Case Name View Scan Logs 
Actor  Manufacturer 
Description  Allows the manufacturer to monitor scan activities, including 
timestamps and locations, to id entify unusual patterns that may 
indicate QR code cloning. 
Pre-Condition Consumers have scanned the products, and data has been recorded 
in the database layer 
Post-Condition The manufacturer gains insights into potential security threats or 
unauthorized duplications. 
 
Consumer Use Case Descriptions 
The Consumer interacts with the system mainly for product verification purposes. 
Table 3.6 Use Case for Scan QR Code 
Use Case ID UC-06  
Use Case Name Scan QR Code 
Actor  Consumer 
Description  The primary interaction where a consumer scans a product's QR 
code to begin the verification process. 
Pre-Condition The consumer has access to the web-based verification interface. 
Post-Condition The system initiates the verification logic (UC-07). 
Includes UC-07: Verify Product Authenticity 
 
 

--- PAGE 48 ---
32 
Table 3.7 Use Case for Verify Product Authenticity 
Use Case ID UC-07  
Use Case Name Verify Product Authenticity 
Actor  Consumer (triggered by system) 
Description  The system validates the product by checking the tamper -evident 
ledger and scan history. 
Pre-Condition A QR code has been scanned (UC-06). 
Post-Condition Authenticity status and product information are displayed to th e 
consumer. 
Includes UC-08: Check Revocation Status 
 
Table 3.8 Use Case for Check Revocation Status 
Use Case ID UC-08  
Use Case Name Check Revocation Status 
Actor  System / Tamper-Evident Ledger 
Description  An internal system operation that determines whether the product 
has been revoked by the manufacturer. 
Pre-Condition The product ID has been successfully located in the ledger records. 
Post-Condition The system identifies if the item is "Revoked" or "Active." 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 49 ---
33 
Table 3.9 Use Case for View Product Information 
Use Case ID UC-09  
Use Case Name View Product Information 
Actor  Consumer 
Description  After verification, the consumer views details like product name, 
manufacturer, and status. 
Pre-Condition UC-07 (Verification) and UC -08 (Revocation Check) are 
completed. 
Post-Condition Consumer is informed about the specific details and origin of the 
product. 
 
Table 3.10 Use Case for Receive Revocation Alert 
Use Case ID UC-10  
Use Case Name Receive Revocation Alert 
Actor  Consumer 
Description  If a product has been marked as invalid by the manufacturer, the 
consumer receives a warning alert. 
Pre-Condition Verification logic identifies a "Revoked" flag on the ledger record. 
Post-Condition Warning message is displayed to the consumer. 
 
3.3.6 Activity Diagram 
Figure 3.5 illustrates the systematic logic of the product verification workflow, 
mapping the transition from the initial QR code scan to the final status display for the 
consumer.  

--- PAGE 50 ---
34 
 
Figure 3.5 Activity Diagram of the Consumer Product Verification Process 
 
The verification process is initiated when a consumer scans the product’s QR code. 
The system forwards the scanned data to the backend, which cross -references the 
information against the tamper-evident ledger to confirm that the product has been properly 


--- PAGE 51 ---
35 
registered. If no corresponding record is found, the product is immediately flagged as 
invalid.  
For registered products, the system performs additional validation by analysing scan 
history to identify potential QR code cloning and by checking the current revocation status 
recorded in the ledger. The process concludes by returning a clear verification result to the 
consumer, indicating whether the product is authentic, suspicious, or revoked. 
3.3.7 Sequence Diagram 
Sequence diagrams provide a visual representation of the interactions between 
system components over time, illustrating the order of operations and message flows during 
key processes. These diagrams are essential for understanding the dynamic behaviour of the 
proposed product authentication system. The following sections detail the primary sequence 
diagrams that demonstrate the system's core functionality.  
Figure 3.6 illustrates the workflow for registering new products in the authentication 
system. The process begins at the Manufacturer Dashboard, where essential product details 
such as product name and batch number are submitted. The backend system coordinates the 
registration workflow by validating the input data and recording the registration event  in a 
tamper-evident ledger. Once the ledger entry is successfully created, a unique QR code is 
generated and associated with the registered product. The product identifier and QR code 
reference are then stored in the relational database to support efficie nt retrieval and 
verification operations. This completes the product registration process while maintaining 
traceability and resistance to unauthorized modification.  

--- PAGE 52 ---
36 
 
Figure 3.6 Sequence Diagram for Product Registration 
 
Figure 3.7 illustrates the chronological communication between system components 
during a product verification request. The process is initiated when a consumer scans a QR 
code, which is transmitted from the user interface to the backend sys tem. The backend 
performs a multi-stage verification process by first retrieving the product’s registration and 
revocation status from the tamper-evident ledger. Subsequently, the backend executes a local 
analyzeScanHistory() function to evaluate scan patt erns and identify potential clone risk 
based on heuristic analysis. Finally, the verification outcome is returned to the user interface, 
where the consumer is informed of the product’s authenticity status or potential risk 
indication. 


--- PAGE 53 ---
37 
 
Figure 3.7 Sequence Diagram for Product Verification 
 
Figure 3.8 shows the process for administratively invalidating a product, such as for 
stolen goods or recalled batches. The process begins when the manufacturer identifies a 
product identifier and submits a revocation request through the administrative dashboard. 
The backend system processes this request by recording the revocation event in the tamper-
evident ledger. In parallel, the backend updates the product’s status in the relational database 
to ensure consistency across system components. This approach ensures that both the 
manufacturer dashboard and the consumer verification interface immediately reflect the 
revoked status of the product. 


--- PAGE 54 ---
38 
 
Figure 3.8 Sequence Diagram for Product Revocation 
 
3.3.8 Tamper-Evident Ledger Design 
The system incorporates a tamper -evident ledger to record critical product -related 
events in an immutable and auditable manner. Rather than functioning as a fully 
decentralized blockchain network, the ledger applies core blockchain principles such as 
cryptographic hash chaining and append -only data structures to ensure data integrity and 
traceability.  
Each ledger entry represents a significant system event, including product 
registration, QR code verification, and product revocation. These events are recor ded as 
sequential ledger blocks, forming a hash-linked chain that preserves the integrity of historical 
records. Any unauthorized modification to a stored block would break the hash linkage, 
making tampering immediately detectable. 
Ledger Block Structure 
Each ledger block contains a minimal set of metadata required to ensure immutability 
and integrity of recorded events. The block stores essential information such as hash values, 
references to previous blocks, and event data. Instead of storing full product or scan details, 


--- PAGE 55 ---
39 
the system uses a structured payload containing reference identifiers, ensuring efficient 
storage while maintaining traceability. 
Table 3.11 Ledger Block Structure 
Field Name Description 
block_height Position of the block within the chain 
hash Hash of the current block 
previous_hash Hash of the previous block to ensure chaining 
recalculated_hash Recomputed hash used for validation 
data_payload Contains event type and reference ID  
(REGISTER, VERIFY, REVOKE) 
block_valid Indicates whether the block is valid after verification 
timestamp Date and time when the block was created 
 
Hashing Mechanism 
The integrity of each ledger block is maintained using the SHA -256 cryptographic 
hash function. The block hash (hash) is computed by hashing a concatenation of key fields, 
including the previous_hash, timestamp, and data_payload. This ensures that each block is 
uniquely bound to its predecessor, and any modification to a block will result i n a hash 
mismatch, thereby invalidating all subsequent blocks in the chain. 
To support integrity verification, the system recalculates the hash 
(recalculated_hash) during validation and compares it with the stored hash value. Any 
inconsistency indicates po tential tampering. The first block in the ledger, known as 
the genesis block, uses a predefined value for the previous_hash field to initialise the chain. 
Ledger Operation and Integration 
All interactions with the tamper-evident ledger are managed by the backend system. 
When a relevant event occurs, such as product registration, verification, or revocation, the 

--- PAGE 56 ---
40 
backend generates a new ledger block, computes its hash, and appends it to the existing 
chain. Once recorded, ledger entries are immutable and cannot be altered or removed without 
compromising the integrity of the entire chain. 
The ledger operates alongside the relational database, with each component serving 
a distinct role. The database supports operational queries and user interactions, while the 
ledger maintains an immutable audit trail of critical events. The event details are stored in a 
structured data_payload, which contains reference identifiers rather than full data records. 
This separation enhances system efficiency while ensuring traceabili ty, transparency, and 
reliable product verification. 
3.3.9 QR Code Security Design and Threat Assumptions 
The QR security design aims to prevent trivial forgery or manipulation while 
operating under realistic attacker capabilities in a consumer-facing environment. Rather than 
relying on secrecy of the QR code itself, the design enforces authenticity and integrity 
through backend verification and cryptographic validation. This approach balances 
cryptographic protection with practical deployment constraints, acknow ledging that QR 
codes are publicly visible once products enter the market.  
QR Code Content Design 
Each QR code encodes a cryptographically protected verification payload rather than 
raw product information. The payload consists of a randomly generated, non -sequential 
qr_id, an optional issuance timestamp, and a cryptographic integrity token. No plainte xt 
product details or sequential identifiers are stored directly in the QR code in order to prevent 
information leakage and identifier enumeration.  

--- PAGE 57 ---
41 
The integrity token is generated using a hash -based message authentication code 
(HMAC) computed by the backend system with a server-side secret key. Upon scanning, the 
backend recomputes the HMAC over the received payload and validates it before any 
verification logic is executed. Any modification to the QR content invalidates the integrity  
check, ensuring that attackers cannot forge or alter QR data without access to the secret key.  
If a URL is used within the QR code, it functions solely as a transport mechanism to 
deliver the encoded payload to the verification service. Trust decisions are not based on the 
URL itself but are determined exclusively through backend cryptographic validation and 
database checks. 
Backend Protection and Enumeration Resistance 
All QR scan requests are processed by the backend verification service and validated 
against registered records in the QR_Code table. Requests containing unknown, malformed, 
or invalid payloads are rejected and logged for monitoring and analysis. Manufacturer and 
administrative operations, including product registration, QR issuance, and revocation, are 
restricted to authenticated users through the management dashboard, ensuring that only 
authorized entities can perform sensitive actions. 
Threat Assumptions 
The system is designed under the following realistic attacker assumptions:  
 An attacker can physically copy and reprint valid QR codes onto counterfeit 
products.  
 An attacker can collect or scrape QR codes from legitimate products.  
 An attacker can replay scan requests to the verification backend.  

--- PAGE 58 ---
42 
 An attacker may attempt to tamper with stored records or product status. 
The system assumes that attackers cannot access backend secret keys, bypass authenticated 
manufacturer controls, or modify ledger records without detection. 
Security Scope and Limitations 
While cryptographic protect ions prevent QR code tampering and unauthorized 
backend manipulation, they cannot prevent the physical duplication of a valid QR code. 
Consequently, QR security is intentionally combined with scan history analysis and 
revocation logic. This layered approac h enables cloned QR codes to be identified through 
anomalous usage patterns and invalidated through administrative intervention when 
necessary. 
3.3.10 Clone Detection Design 
The clone detection mechanism is designed to identify abnormal QR code usage 
patterns tha t may indicate unauthorized duplication of authentic product identifiers. The 
mechanism does not aim to conclusively identify counterfeit products, but rather to provide 
early risk indicators that support manufacturer monitoring and decision-making. Rather than 
attempting to provide definitive proof of counterfeiting, the system performs rule-based scan 
analysis to assess the likelihood of suspicious behaviour based on historical scan data. This 
approach acknowledges the presence of legitimate repeated scan s while providing 
manufacturers with actionable indicators for further investigation.  
Each QR code scan is processed as part of the product verification workflow. Upon 
receiving a verification request, the backend system first retrieves the product’s curr ent 
status from the tamper -evident ledger to determine whether the item is valid or revoked.  

--- PAGE 59 ---
43 
During this verification process, the scan event is recorded in the Scan_Log table before 
clone risk analysis is performed. Logged metadata includes the scan times tamp, an 
approximate geographic location derived from IP geolocation, and basic device information. 
These records collectively form the historical dataset used for behavioural analysis. 
Detection Criteria 
Clone detection is evaluated using configurable thr esholds applied within a rolling 
time window. A QR code is flagged as suspicious when one or more of the following 
conditions are satisfied:  
 The same QR code is scanned more than N times within a defined time 
window T.  
 Consecutive scans originate from geographically distant locations, as inferred 
from IP geolocation, within an unrealistically short time interval Δt, 
exceeding a distance threshold D.  
 The overall scan frequency exceeds expected consumer behaviour for a single 
product unit over an extended period.  
Threshold values are selected to balance detection sensitivity while minimising false 
positives caused by legitimate behaviour, such as in -store verification, post -purchase 
rescans, retailer inventory checks, or product resale. 
Risk Classification 
Based on the analysis results, the system assigns a risk level to each QR code:  
 Low Risk: Scan behaviour is consistent with normal usage patterns.  
 Medium Risk: Unusual scan frequency or location variance is detected.  

--- PAGE 60 ---
44 
 High Risk: Strong indicators of potential QR code duplication are present.  
Risk assessments are stored in the Clone_Risk table and are intended to support 
manufacturer monitoring and investigative decision -making rather than enforce automatic 
blocking of consumer access. 
System Behaviour 
When a QR code is flagged with a Medium or High risk level, the following actions occur:  
 A warning indicator is displayed on the manufacturer dashboard.  
 Scan history details are made available for further review.  
 Consumers continue to receive verification results, accompanied by an 
advisory message in high-risk cases.  
Importantly, clone detection does not override revocation logic. If a product has been 
administratively revoked, the revocation status takes precedence re gardless of scan 
behaviour. 
Handling Legitimate Repeated Scans 
The system explicitly accounts for legitimate repeated scans, including in -store 
verification, post-purchase rescans, retailer inventory checks, and resale scenarios. For this 
reason, clone det ection does not automatically invalidate products, but instead assigns a 
graduated risk level to guide manufacturer review and investigation. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 61 ---
45 
Location Source and Reliability 
Scan location data is derived using approximate IP -based geolocation, which 
provides coarse -grained geographic information rather than precise GPS coordinates. 
Location is therefore used as a contextual indicator rather than a definitive proof of misuse. 
Threshold and Time Window Assumptions 
A QR code is flagged as suspicious when it exceeds predefined behavioural 
thresholds, such as more than three scans within a ten -minute window, or scans originating 
from geographically distant locations (e.g., >50 km) within an unrealistically short time 
interval. These thresholds are configurable and selected to balance detection sensitivity 
while minimizing false positives.  
Evaluation Approach 
Clone detection effectiveness is evaluated through simulated scan scenarios, 
including normal consumer behaviour , repeated legitimate scans, and intentional QR code 
reuse, allowing qualitative assessment of false-positive and detection tendencies. 
Pseudocode for Clone Detection Logic 
function analyzeScanHistory(scans): 
    sort scans by scan_time 
    for each consecutive pair of scans: 
        scan1 = previous scan 
        scan2 = current scan 
        if scan1.location is missing or scan2.location is missing: 
            continue 
        distance = calculateDistance(scan1.location, scan2.location) 

--- PAGE 62 ---
46 
        time_difference = calculateTimeDifference(scan1.time, scan2.time) 
        if distance > D and time_difference < Δt: 
            return HIGH_RISK 
    return LOW_RISK 
 
3.3.11 Revocation Mechanism Design 
The revocation mechanism enables manufacturers to administratively invalidate 
registered products that are identified as counterfeit, recalled, or compromised. This 
mechanism ensures that once a product is revoked, its status is consistently enforced acros s 
the system and is immediately visible to both manufacturers and consumers.  
Revocation is treated as a state transition event rather than a data deletion operation. 
This approach preserves historical records while ensuring that invalid products can no longer 
be verified as authentic. Revocation is treated as a permanent and irreversible state transition 
within the system to preserve audit integrity and prevent abuse. Once revoked, a product 
cannot return to an active state, and any correction requires a n ew product registration and 
QR code issuance. 
Consumer-Side Behaviour  
When a consumer scans a QR code associated with a revoked product:  
 The system detects the revoked status during verification  
 A high-priority alert is displayed to the consumer  
 The product is explicitly marked as Revoked or Invalid  
Revoked items cannot return an Authentic status under any circumstances.  

--- PAGE 63 ---
47 
Revocation Policy  
To maintain system integrity and auditability:  
 Revocation is irreversible within the system  
 Any correction requires a new product registration with a new QR code  
 All revocation events remain permanently recorded in the ledger  
This policy prevents abuse and ensures that revocation decisions are transparent and 
accountable.  
Pseudocode for Revocation Logic 
function revokeProduct(product_id, reason): 
    product = getProduct(product_id) 
    if product does not exist: 
        return "Product not found" 
    if product.status != "active": 
        return "Invalid revocation request" 
    begin transaction 
update product 
        set status = "revoked", 
            revoke_reason = reason, 
            updated_at = current_timestamp 
        where product_id = product_id 
    update qr_code 
        set is_active = false 
        where product_id = product_id 

--- PAGE 64 ---
48 
    appendLedgerBlock( 
        data_type = "REVOKE", 
        data_reference_id = product_id 
    ) 
    commit transaction 
    return "Product revoked successfully" 
 
3.3.12 API Design and Endpoints 
The system implements a RESTful API to enable secure interaction between client 
applications and backend services. The API is logically divided into consumer -facing 
verification endpoints and manufacturer administrative endpoints to enforce role -based 
access control. Consumer endpoints are restricted to QR code verifica tion and return the 
product verification status together with advisory clone -risk indicators. Manufacturer 
endpoints support product lifecycle management, including product registration, revocation, 
and monitoring of scan activity. All requests are processed by the backend application layer, 
where token integrity validation, scan logging, clone -risk analysis, and ledger updates are 
performed. Direct access to the tamper-evident ledger is restricted to backend services only, 
ensuring controlled and auditable state changes. This API design supports modular system 
development while remaining suitable for prototype-level implementation. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 65 ---
49 
Core API Endpoints  
Table 3.12 List of API Core Endpoints 
Category Endpoint Method Description 
Consumer /verify POST Verifies a scanned QR code token and 
returns the product authenticity status 
together with clone risk indication. 
Consumer /scan/log POST Records scan metadata such as 
timestamp and approximate location for 
behavioural and clone detection 
analysis. 
Manufacturer /auth/login POST Authenticates manufacturer users and 
grants access to administrative 
functions. 
Manufacturer /product/register POST Registers a new product and generates a 
unique QR code identifier linked to the 
ledger. 
Manufacturer /product/revoke POST Revokes a registered product due to 
recall, compromise, or counterfeit 
confirmation. 
Manufacturer /product/status GET Retrieves the current verification and 
revocation status of a product. 
Manufacturer /analytics/scans GET Displays scan history and clone risk 
indicators for monitoring and 
investigation. 
Internal 
Backend 
/ledger/append POST Appends immutable verification and 
lifecycle events to the tamper ‑evident 
ledger. 
Internal 
Backend 
/clone/analyze POST Performs rule ‑based clone detection 
analysis using historical scan data. 

--- PAGE 66 ---
50 
3.3.13 User Interface Design 
Figure 3.9 shows the manufacturer’s dashboard interface with a centralized overview 
of the system. The dashboard displays real -time analytic s, including the total number of 
registered products and active scan activities. It serves as the primary control centre for 
manufacturers to register products, generate unique QR codes linked to ledger records, and 
manage product lifecycles through the re vocation module. This interface supports efficient 
monitoring and administrative control while ensuring consistency with the system’s tamper-
evident ledger design. 
 
Figure 3.9 Manufacturer Administrative Dashboard Interface 
 
Figure 3.10 illustrates a dashboard for manufacturers to monitor products in real 
time. It highlights key performance indicators, provides insights into product lifecycles, and 
shows concise status summaries of active, pending, and revoke d products recorded in the 


--- PAGE 67 ---
51 
tamper-evident ledger. This enables administrators to manage supply chain integrity, track 
top-performing products, and address potential security threats.  
 
Figure 3.10 Manufacturer Analytics Dashboard Interface 
 
Figure 3.11 shows the revocation history interface. This interface allows 
manufacturers to track and manage all invalidated product records. It provides a quick 
overview of total revocations, affected units, and action status, while a detailed list shows 
individual entries with identifiers, severity, and technical notes. This interface enhances 
transparency and accountability by ensuring that all revocation events are consistently 
recorded and traceable through th e tamper -evident ledger, thereby supporting system 
integrity and auditability. 


--- PAGE 68 ---
52 
 
Figure 3.11 Manufacturer Revocation History Interface 
 
Figure 3.12 shows the QR code scanning interface used by consumers during the 
verification process. The interface is designed for ease of use, featuring a high -contrast 
viewfinder and real-time camera feedback to ensure accurate scanning. This module serve s 
as the entry point to the consumer verification workflow, capturing the encrypted QR data 
and transmitting it to the backend system for validation against the tamper-evident ledger.  


--- PAGE 69 ---
53 
 
Figure 3.12 Consumer Scanning Module 
 
Figure 3.13 is displayed when a product passes all three security tiers, which are 
identity validation, clone detection, and revocation status check. The prominent use of green 
colour coding and a checkmark icon provides immediate visual c onfirmation to the 
consumer that the product is genuine and safe for use.  


--- PAGE 70 ---
54 
 
Figure 3.13 Verification Result (Authentic Result) 
 
Figure 3.14 is triggered when the system detects a "Replay Attack" through scan  
history analysis. The yellow warning theme alerts the consumer that the specific QR code 
has been scanned in multiple locations or across an unrealistic timeframe, indicating that the 
code may have been duplicated by a counterfeiter. 


--- PAGE 71 ---
55 
 
Figure 3.14 Verification Result (Suspicious/Cloned Warning) 
 
Figure 3.15 is used to display high-priority alerts during the verification process. This 
screen is shown when a product has been officially revoked by the manufacturer or when the 
scanned QR code does not exist in the tamper -evident ledger. The interface clearly warns 
the consumer of the potential risk and provides guidance to avoid using the product and to 
report the issue if necessary. 


--- PAGE 72 ---
56 
 
Figure 3.15 Verification Result (Revoked or Invalid Status) 
 
3.4 Summary  
This chapter presented the requirement analysis and system design for the proposed 
product authentication system. The functional and non -functional requirem ents were 
identified based on literature review and observed limitations of existing solutions. These 
requirements define the expected behaviour, performance, and security aspects of the 
system.  


--- PAGE 73 ---
57 
The chapter also outlined the system design, including the o verall system 
architecture, Level 0 data flow diagram, use case interactions, activity flow, sequence of 
operations, and user interface design. These design elements provide a clear understanding 
of how users interact with the system and how product verifi cation, clone detection, and 
revocation processes are carried out. The information in this chapter serves as a foundation 
for the system implementation, which will be discussed in the next chapter. 
 

--- PAGE 74 ---
58 
CHAPTER 4  
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the implementation of the proposed product authentication 
system. The system was developed based on the design outlined in Chapter 3 and integrates 
a backend server, a PostgreSQL database, and a web -based user interface for both 
manufacturers and consumers. The purpose of this chapter is to explain how the proposed 
design was translated into a functional prototype and to describe how the implemented 
modules operate cohesively in practice.  
The completed prototype supports product regis tration, QR code generation, QR 
payload protection, product verification, scan logging, clone risk detection, product 
revocation, and tamper-evident ledger recording. The implementation focuses on delivering 
an end-to-end proof of concept within a controll ed environment. This chapter also outlines 
the system requirements, development setup, implementation details, and the overall 
workflow of the completed system. 
4.2 System Requirements 
4.2.1 Hardware Requirement 
The system was developed and tested using a laptop equipped with an AMD Ryzen 
5 processor with Radeon Graphics and 16 GB of RAM. This hardware configuration 
provided sufficient computational capability and memory to support local development, 
backend execution, database management, and browser-based testing.  

--- PAGE 75 ---
59 
The processor handled server -side request processing, QR code generation, hash 
computation, and ledger -related operations, while the available memory supported 
multitasking activities such as running t he code editor, database tools, local server, and 
browser simultaneously without significant performance degradation. Adequate storage 
space was also required to install software tools, project dependencies, and database files.  
An internet connection was required during development for downloading 
dependencies, accessing technical documentation, and supporting certain testing activities 
such as IP -based geolocation lookup. Overall, the hardware used was sufficient to support 
stable development and testing of the prototype in a controlled environment.  
4.2.2 Software Requirements 
The system was developed on the Windows operating system. The backend was 
implemented using Node.js and the Express framework, which were used to provide server-
side logic, REST-style API routing, QR payload validation, clone detection logic, revocation 
handling, and ledger integration.  
PostgreSQL was used as the relational database management system to store 
structured data such as product records, QR identifiers, scan logs, clone risk a ssessments, 
and ledger blocks. Database interaction was handled through the pg library. The frontend 
was implemented using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript to create a web -based dashboard and 
consumer-facing verification interface. Frontend -backend communication was performed 
using the Fetch API.  
Several development tools were used throughout the implementation process. Visual 
Studio Code was used as the primary source code editor, pgAdmin was used for database 

--- PAGE 76 ---
60 
administration, and Postman was used for API testing . Additional supporting packages 
included dotenv for environment configuration, qrcode for QR image generation, and cors 
for handling cross-origin requests during testing.  
4.3 System Development 
4.3.1 Installation and Configuration 
The development environment was prepared by installing Node.js, PostgreSQL, and 
the required development tools. After the project structure was created, the necessary 
dependencies were installed using npm. These dependencies included Express for backend 
routing, pg for PostgreSQL connectivity, dotenv for environment variable management, and 
qrcode for QR code generation.  
System configuration was managed through an environment file (.env) to improve 
maintainability and reduce hardcoded values in the source code. Important configuration 
values included the public verification URL, database connection settings, HMAC secret 
key for QR security, and threshold values for clone detection. This approach made the 
implementation easier to manage and allowed sensitive values to be kept separate from the 
main application logic.  
After configuration was completed, the Express server was connected to the 
PostgreSQL database and tested locally. Once the backend routes were functioning correctly, 
the frontend pages were integrated with the backend API to s upport full system interaction 
through the browser. 

--- PAGE 77 ---
61 
4.4 System Implementation 
4.4.1 Backend Implementation 
The backend system was implemented using Node.js and Express following a REST-
style API structure. It handles the main operations of the authentication workflow, including 
product registration, QR generation, signed payload verification, scan logging, clone risk 
evaluation, revocation processing, analytics retrieval, and ledger block creation.  
During product registration, the backend receives product details fr om the 
manufacturer dashboard, inserts the product into the database, generates a unique non -
sequential QR identifier, constructs a signed verification payload, and returns a QR 
verification URL together with a generated QR image. A corresponding ledger block is also 
appended to record the registration event.  
router.post("/product/register", async (req, res) => { 
  const { name, manufacturer_id, serial_number } = req.body; 
  const client = await pool.connect(); 
  try { 
    await client.query("BEGIN"); 
    const productResult = await client.query( 
      `INSERT INTO product (manufacturer_id, product_name, 
serial_number) 
       VALUES ($1, $2, $3) RETURNING *`, 
      [manufacturer_id, name, serial_number] 
    ); 
    const product = productResult.rows[0]; 
    const qr_value = crypto.randomUUID(); 

--- PAGE 78 ---
62 
    await client.query( 
      `INSERT INTO qr_code (product_id, qr_value) 
       VALUES ($1, $2)`, 
      [product.product_id, qr_value] 
    ); 
    await insertLedger("REGISTER", product.product_id, 
client); 
    const baseUrl = buildPublicBaseUrl(req); 
    const { payload, qrUrl } = buildVerificationUrl(baseUrl, 
qr_value); 
    const qrImage = await QRCode.toDataURL(qrUrl); 
    await client.query("COMMIT"); 
    res.json({ 
      message: "Product registered", 
      qr_value, 
      qr_payload: payload, 
      qr_url: qrUrl, 
      qr_image: qrImage 
    }); 
  } catch (err) { 
    await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
    console.error("ERROR:", err); 
    res.status(500).json({ error: "Server error" }); 
  } finally { 
    client.release(); 
  } 
}); 
Figure 4.1 Code Snippet for Product Registration Route 
 

--- PAGE 79 ---
63 
This route shows how the backend handles product registration by combining 
database insertion, QR identifier creation, signed payload generation, and ledger recording 
into a single workflow. This ensures that a newly registered product is immediately linke d 
to a verifiable QR code and an auditable event record.  
The backend also processes verification and revocation requests. During verification, 
the backend validates the signed QR payload before any database lookup is performed. If 
valid, the system retrieves the associated product, stores the scan metadata, evaluates clone 
risk, checks whether the product has been revoked, and returns the correct verification status. 
Revocation is handled through a dedicated route that changes the product status, disables the 
QR code, and appends a revocation event to the ledger.  
router.post("/product/revoke", async (req, res) => { 
  const { product_id, reason } = req.body; 
  const client = await pool.connect(); 
  try { 
    await client.query("BEGIN"); 
    const productResult = await client.query( 
      `SELECT product_status FROM product WHERE product_id 
= $1`, 
      [product_id] 
    ); 
    if (productResult.rows.length === 0) { 
      await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
      return res.status(404).json({ error: "Product not 
found" }); 
    } 
     

--- PAGE 80 ---
64 
if (productResult.rows[0].product_status !== "active") { 
      await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
      return res.status(400).json({ 
        error: "Invalid revocation request. Only active 
products can be revoked." 
      }); 
    } 
    await client.query( 
      `UPDATE product 
       SET product_status = 'revoked', 
           revoke_reason = $2, 
           updated_at = NOW() 
       WHERE product_id = $1`, 
      [product_id, reason] 
    ); 
    await client.query( 
      `UPDATE qr_code 
       SET is_active = false 
       WHERE product_id = $1`, 
      [product_id] 
    ); 
    await insertLedger("REVOKE", product_id, client); 
    await client.query("COMMIT"); 
    res.json({ message: "Product revoked with reason" }); 
  } catch (err) { 
    await client.query("ROLLBACK"); 
    console.error(err); 
    res.status(500).json({ error: "Revocation failed" }); 
  } finally { 
    client.release(); 

--- PAGE 81 ---
65 
  } 
});  
Figure 4.2 Code Snippet for Product Revocation Route 
 
This revocation route demonstrates how the backend enforces revocation as an 
irreversible administrative action for active products only. It ensures that the product state, 
QR activation status, and ledger history remain consistent. 
4.4.2 Database Implementation 
The database was implemented according to the relational structure designed in 
Chapter 3 and refined to support the final prototype. It contains several interconnected tables 
that collectively support product registration, QR management, scan tracking, clone -risk 
evaluation, revocation management, and ledger recording.  
The product table stores the main product information, including product name, serial 
number, current status, and revocation reason. The qr_code table stores the unique QR 
identifier assigned to each product and its activation status. The scan_log table stores the 
history of verification scans, including QR reference, timestamp,  IP address, device 
information, and approximate location. The clone_risk table stores the most recent risk 
assessment for each QR code. The ledger_block table stores sequential tamper -evident 
ledger records for registration, verification, and revocation events.  
Relationships between these tables are maintained using foreign keys to preserve 
consistency between products, QR identifiers, scan history, and risk records. This relational 
structure provides both operational efficiency and traceability of critical system events. 

--- PAGE 82 ---
66 
 
Figure 4.3 Implemented Database Table in pgAdmin 
 
4.4.3 Frontend Implementation 
The frontend was implemented as a web -based interface using HTML, CSS, and 
JavaScript. It supports both manufactur er-side operations and consumer -side verification. 
The manufacturer-facing side includes the admin login page, registration dashboard, product 
list page, analytics page, and revocation history page, while the consumer -facing side 
includes the product verification page.  
The dashboard enables manufacturers to register products and immediately view the 
generated QR code for download. The product list page displays all registered products and 
provides a revocation action for active items. The analytics page presents summary statistics 
such as total products, total scans, revoked items, and scan activity. The revocation history 
page displays revoked products and their associated information.  
The frontend communicates with the backend asynchronously using the Fetch API. 
This a llows the pages to request data and submit actions dynamically, improving 


--- PAGE 83 ---
67 
responsiveness and usability. A lightweight API configuration mechanism was also 
implemented to support correct communication with the backend in different local testing 
environments. 
 
Figure 4.4 Admin Login Interface 
  
 
Figure 4.5 Manufacturer Dashboard Interface 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 84 ---
68 
 
Figure 4.6  Product List Interface 
 
 
Figure 4.7 Analytics Dashboard 
 
 


--- PAGE 85 ---
69 
 
Figure 4.8 Revocation History Interface 
 
4.4.4 Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
The graphical user interface was designed with clarity, simplicity, and usability in 
mind. On the manufacturer side, a structured dashboard layout with a sidebar menu, input 
forms, and summary cards was used to support efficient navigation across the main modules. 
This design helps the user move easily between registration, product listing, analytics, and 
revocation tracking.  
On the consumer side, the verification interface was designed to clearly present 
product authenticity results using different visual states. Authentic products are shown using 
a green success state. Suspicious products are shown using an orange cautionary 
recommendation banner. Revoked and invalid products are presented using a red warning 
state to clearly indicate that the item should not be trusted.  
This visual design improves the readability of verification results and supports 
quicker user understanding during product authentication.  


--- PAGE 86 ---
70 
 
Figure 4.9 Consumer Scanning Module 
 
 
Figure 4.10 Authentic Product Verification Interface 
 
 


--- PAGE 87 ---
71 
 
Figure 4.11  Suspicious Product Verification Interface 
 
 
Figure 4.12 Revoked Product Verification Interface 
 


--- PAGE 88 ---
72 
 
Figure 4.13  Invalid Product Verification Interface 
 
4.4.5 QR Code Security Implementation 
QR code security was implemented by storing a cr yptographically protected 
verification payload inside the QR code instead of storing raw product information. Each 
payload contains a non-sequential QR identifier, an issuance timestamp, and a cryptographic 
signature. This design reduces the risk of data e xposure and makes QR tampering easier to 
detect.  
The backend generates the signature using HMAC -SHA256 together with a server-
side secret key stored in the environment configuration. During product registration, a signed 
payload is created and embedded into the verification URL. This URL is then encoded as a 
QR image and returned to the frontend.  
 


--- PAGE 89 ---
73 
function signPayload(qrId, issuedAt) { 
  return crypto 
    .createHmac("sha256", getQrSecret()) 
    .update(`${qrId}.${issuedAt}`) 
    .digest("hex"); 
} 
function buildSignedPayload(qrId, issuedAt = new 
Date().toISOString()) { 
  const payload = { 
    qr_id: qrId, 
    issued_at: issuedAt, 
    sig: signPayload(qrId, issuedAt) 
  }; 
   
 
Return 
Buffer.from(JSON.stringify(payload)).toString("base64url"); 
}  
Figure 4.14 Code Snippet for HMAC Signature Generation 
 
This code shows how the QR identifier and issuance timestamp are protected using 
a server-generated HMAC signature. The resulting payload is then encode d into a format 
suitable for inclusion in the QR verification URL.  
When a consumer scans a QR code, the backend validates the signed payload before 
any database query is performed. If the payload is missing, malformed, or cryptographically 
invalid, the re quest is rejected immediately. This prevents modified QR data from being 
treated as legitimate input.  

--- PAGE 90 ---
74 
function verifySignedPayload(encodedPayload) { 
  if (!encodedPayload) { 
    return { valid: false, reason: "Missing QR payload" }; 
  } 
  try { 
    const parsed = JSON.parse( 
      Buffer.from(encodedPayload,"base64url").toString("utf8") 
    ); 
    const { qr_id: qrId, issued_at: issuedAt, sig } = parsed; 
    if (!qrId || !issuedAt || !sig) { 
      return { valid: false, reason: "Incomplete QR payload" }; 
    } 
    const expectedSig = signPayload(qrId, issuedAt); 
    const isValid = 
      sig.length === expectedSig.length && 
      crypto.timingSafeEqual(Buffer.from(sig), 
Buffer.from(expectedSig)); 
    if (!isValid) { 
      return { valid: false, reason: "Invalid QR signature" }; 
    } 
    return { 
      valid: true, 
      qrId, 
      issuedAt 
    }; 
  } catch (err) { 
    return { valid: false, reason: "Malformed QR payload" }; 
  } 

--- PAGE 91 ---
75 
}  
Figure 4.15 Code Snippet for Signed QR Payload Validation 
 
This validation function ensures that only authentic and unmodified QR payloads are 
processed by the system. It forms an essential part of the QR security mechanism. 
 
Figure 4.16  Generated QR Code with Signed Verification Payload 
4.4.6 Product Verification Module 
The product verification module is responsible for determining the authenticity state 
of a scanned product. When a verification request is received, the backend first validates the 
signed QR payload. If the payload is valid, the corresponding QR identifier  is matched to a 
registered record in the database.  
router.post("/verify", async (req, res) => { 
  const { payload } = req.body; 
  try { 
    const validatedPayload = verifySignedPayload(payload); 
    if (!validatedPayload.valid) { 
      return res.json({ 


--- PAGE 92 ---
76 
        status: "Invalid", 
        message: validatedPayload.reason 
      }); 
    } 
    const result = await pool.query( 
      `SELECT q.qr_id, q.qr_value, q.is_active, 
              p.product_id, p.product_name, p.serial_number, 
              p.product_status, p.revoke_reason 
       FROM qr_code q 
       JOIN product p ON q.product_id = p.product_id 
       WHERE q.qr_value = $1`, 
      [validatedPayload.qrId] 
    ); 
    if (result.rows.length === 0) { 
      return res.json({ 
        status: "Invalid", 
        message: "QR payload does not match a registered 
product" 
      }); 
    } 
    const data = result.rows[0]; 
    if (data.product_status === "revoked" || data.is_active 
=== false) { 
      return res.json({ 
        status: "Revoked", 
        reason: data.revoke_reason, 
        message: "This product has been revoked" 
      }); 
    } 
    return res.json({ 

--- PAGE 93 ---
77 
      status: "Authentic", 
      product: data.product_name, 
      serial: data.serial_number, 
      message: "Product verified successfully" 
    }); 
  } catch (err) { 
    console.error("ERROR:", err.message); 
    res.status(500).json({ error: "Server error" }); 
  } 
}); 
Figure 4.17 Code Snippet for Verification Request Processing 
 
This code shows that the  verification route first performs cryptographic validation 
and then uses the decoded QR identifier to retrieve the associated product record from the 
database. This helps ensure that product verification depends on both payload integrity and 
backend record existence. 
Once the product is identified, the backend evaluates the product’s current status and 
recent scan behaviour. If the product is active and scan behaviour appears normal, the result 
is returned as authentic. If suspicious behaviour is detected, the system returns a suspicious 
result. If the product has been revoked, it is returned as revoked regardless of scan behaviour. 
if (data.product_status === "revoked" || data.is_active === 
false) { 
  return res.json({ 
    status: "Revoked", 
    reason: data.revoke_reason, 
    message: "This product has been revoked" 
  }); 

--- PAGE 94 ---
78 
} 
 
let status = "Authentic"; 
 
if (riskAssessment.risk === "Medium" || riskAssessment.risk 
=== "High") { 
  status = "Suspicious"; 
} 
 
return res.json({ 
  status, 
  product: data.product_name, 
  serial: data.serial_number, 
  scans: scanCount, 
  risk: riskAssessment.risk, 
  message: riskAssessment.message 
});  
Figure 4.18 Code Snippet for Verification Response Logic 
 
This logic determines the final verification outcome shown to the consumer. It 
ensures that revoked products can never appear authentic and that suspicious scan behaviour 
is communicated through a separate advisory state. 
4.4.7 Scan Tracking and Risk Detection 
Each successful verification request is recorded in the scan_log table before clone -
risk analysis is performed. The stored metadata includes the QR reference, IP address, device 
information, approximate location, and timestamp. These records provide the behavioural 
history required for counterfeit-risk detection.  

--- PAGE 95 ---
79 
await pool.query( 
  `INSERT INTO scan_log (qr_id, ip_address, device_type, 
scan_location) 
   VALUES ($1, $2, $3, $4)`, 
  [data.qr_id, ip, device, location] 
); 
await insertLedger("VERIFY", data.qr_id); 
Figure 4.19 Code Snippet for Scan Log Recording 
 
This code shows how each verification scan is logged and then appended to the 
ledger. Scan recording supports both analytical monitoring and subsequent clone -risk 
evaluation.  
The clone detection mechanism was implemented as a heuristic process that 
evaluates recent scan behaviour within a configurable time window. It checks whether the 
same QR code is scanned excessively within a short interval or whether conse cutive scans 
originate from locations that are too distant for normal movement. This approach improves 
detection accuracy by combining temporal and spatial anomaly analysis rather than relying 
solely on scan frequency.  
function analyzeScanHistory(scans) { 
  if (scans.length > SCAN_HIGH_RISK_COUNT) { 
    return { 
      risk: "High", 
      message: "Multiple scans detected within a short 
verification window" 
    }; 
  } 

--- PAGE 96 ---
80 
  for (let index = 1; index < scans.length; index += 1) { 
    const previous = scans[index - 1]; 
    const current = scans[index]; 
    const previousLocation = 
parseLocation(previous.scan_location); 
    const currentLocation = 
parseLocation(current.scan_location); 
    if (!previousLocation || !currentLocation) continue; 
    const distanceKm = haversineDistanceKm(previousLocation, 
currentLocation); 
    const travelMinutes = minutesBetween(previous.scan_time, 
current.scan_time); 
    if ( 
      distanceKm > DISTANCE_THRESHOLD_KM && 
      travelMinutes < MAX_TRAVEL_MINUTES 
    ) { 
      return { 
        risk: "High", 
        message: "Scan locations changed too far too quickly 
for normal usage" 
      }; 
    } 
  } 
  if (scans.length > SCAN_MEDIUM_RISK_COUNT) { 
    return { 
      risk: "Medium", 
      message: "Unusual repeated scan behaviour detected" 
    }; 
  } 

--- PAGE 97 ---
81 
  return { 
    risk: "Low", 
    message: "Product verified successfully" 
  }; 
} 
Figure 4.20 Code Snippet for Clone Risk Detection Logic 
 
This logic classifies scan behaviour into Low, Medium, or High risk. It provides a 
behavioural warning mechanism rather than an absolute counterfeit decision, thereby 
supporting investigation without automatically invalidating otherwise active products.  
4.4.8 Ledger Block Integration 
A tamper -evident ledger was integrated into the system to provide an auditable 
record of critical product -related events. The ledger stores product registration, product 
verification, and product revocation as sequential hash-linked blocks. Each block contains a 
unique identifier, the previous block’s hash, its own hash, the event type, a related reference 
identifier, and a timestamp. 
async function insertLedger(type, refId, db = pool) { 
  const last = await db.query( 
    `SELECT current_hash FROM ledger_block ORDER BY block_id DESC 
LIMIT 1` 
  ); 
  const previous_hash = last.rows.length 
    ? last.rows[0].current_hash 
    : "GENESIS"; 
  const timestamp = new Date().toISOString(); 

--- PAGE 98 ---
82 
  const data = buildBlockData(type, refId, timestamp, 
previous_hash); 
  const current_hash = generateHash(data); 
  await db.query( 
    `INSERT INTO ledger_block 
     (previous_hash, current_hash, data_type, data_reference_id, 
timestamp) 
     VALUES ($1, $2, $3, $4, $5)`, 
    [previous_hash, current_hash, type, refId, timestamp] 
  ); 
} 
Figure 4.21 Code Snippet for Ledger Block Creation 
 
This function creates a new ledger block by hashing the event information together 
with the previous block’s hash. By including the previous hash in the current block’s hash 
computation, the system ensures that each block is cryptographically linked to the entire 
chain.  
The ledger also supports validation by recalculating the expected hash of each stored 
block and comparing it with the recorded current_hash. At the same time, the system checks 
whether each previous_hash correctly matches the current_hash of the previous block.  
for (const block of result.rows) { 
  const expectedHash = generateHash( 
    buildBlockData( 
      block.data_type, 
      block.data_reference_id, 
      formatStoredTimestamp(block.timestamp), 
      block.previous_hash 

--- PAGE 99 ---
83 
    ) 
  ); 
  if ( 
    block.previous_hash !== previousHash || 
    block.current_hash !== expectedHash 
  ) { 
    isValid = false; 
    break; 
  } 
  previousHash = block.current_hash; 
} 
Figure 4.22 Code Snippet for Ledger Integrity Validation 
 
This validation process ensures that unauthorized modification to stored ledger 
records can be detected. If the ledger validation fails, the system flags the chain as 
compromised, indicating potential tampering or inconsistency in the recorded data. 

--- PAGE 100 ---
84 
 
Figure 4.23  Ledger Validation Output 
 
4.5 System Workflow 
The overall workflow of the system begins when a manufacturer accesses the 
registration dashboard and enters the product details. These details are submitted to the 
backend server, where the system inserts the product record into the database and generates 
a unique non-sequential QR identifier. A signed verification payload is then created using 
HMAC-SHA256 and embedded into a verification URL. This URL is converted into a QR 
code i mage and returned to the frontend for display and download. At the same time, a 
corresponding registration block is appended to the tamper-evident ledger.  
Once the QR code is distributed with the product, a consumer can scan it using a 
mobile device. The verification page extracts the signed payload and sends it to the backend 
verification route. The backend validates the signature before performing any database 


--- PAGE 101 ---
85 
lookup. If the payload is valid, the backend retrieves the linked product and QR record, stores 
the scan log entry, evaluates clone-risk behaviour, checks the product status, and returns the 
final verification result.  
If the product is active and no suspicious behaviour is detected, the system returns 
an authentic result. If unusual scan behaviour is detected, the product is classified as 
suspicious and the frontend displays a recommendation warning. If the product has been 
revoked, the backend immediately returns a revoked result, and the frontend displays a red 
high-priority warning state. If the payload is invalid or cannot be matched to a registered 
record, the system returns an invalid result.  
Manufacturers can also revoke products through the product list page. When a 
revocation request is made, the backend checks that the product is still act ive, updates the 
product status to revoked, disables the linked QR code, and records the revocation event in 
the ledger. Any later verification request for that QR code will therefore return a revoked 
result.  
The workflow demonstrates how the frontend, ba ckend, database, scan logging 
module, clone detection mechanism, and tamper-evident ledger operate together to support 
end-to-end product authentication in the prototype.  

--- PAGE 102 ---
86 
 
Figure 4.24 Overall System Workflow of the Product Authentication System 
 
4.6 Discussion 
This chapter has presented the implementation of the proposed blockchain -inspired 
product authentication system and demonstrated how the system design described in Chapter 
3 was successfully translated int o a functional prototype. The completed system integrates 
key features including product registration, QR code generation, signed payload protection, 
product verification, scan logging, clone -risk assessment, product revocation, analytics 
reporting, and tamper-evident ledger recording.  
The implementation demonstrates that blockchain -inspired mechanisms can be 
effectively applied in a controlled environment to enhance data integrity and support 
counterfeit-risk detection without requiring a fully decentrali zed blockchain network. By 
combining backend cryptographic validation, behavioural scan analysis, and hash -linked 


--- PAGE 103 ---
87 
ledger traceability, the system provides a comprehensive end -to-end workflow for product 
authentication.  
Furthermore, the frontend and backend components were successfully integrated to 
support both manufacturer operations and consumer verification. The use of clear 
verification result states improves usability by enabling users to easily distinguish between 
authentic, suspicious, revoked, and invalid products. In addition, scan logging and risk 
classification provide practical indicators for detecting potential QR code cloning.  
Overall, the implemented prototype satisfies the intended project scope and provides 
a suitable basis for system testing and evaluation. The next stage of the report therefore 
focuses on validating whether the system performs correctly according to the planned 
objectives and functional requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 104 ---
88 
CHAPTER 5  
 
TESTING 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the testing activities carried out for the developed system. The 
purpose of this chapter is to determine whether the system functions correctly according to 
its design objectives and whether it is usable for its intended users. The testing proces s 
focuses on two main aspects, namely functionality testing and usability testing. Functionality 
testing was performed to verify that the main features of the system operate correctly, while 
usability testing was used to evaluate whether the system interfa ce and workflow are 
understandable and practical for users. The findings from these tests provide evidence that 
the system is able to support the intended product authentication process in a controlled 
environment. 
5.2 Software Testing 
Software testing was con ducted to evaluate the reliability and practical usability of 
the developed system. The testing process focused on the core modules of the system, 
including product registration, QR code generation, verification, clone detection, revocation, 
and ledger recording. The system was tested in a controlled environment using a local server, 
PostgreSQL database, and web-based interfaces accessed from desktop and mobile devices.  
The testing was divided into two categories. The first category was functionality 
testing, which examined whether the implemented features produced the expected outputs 
under normal and abnormal conditions. The second category was usability testing, which 
focused on whether users could interact with the system effectively and whether the 
verification flow was suitable for practical use, especially on mobile devices.  

--- PAGE 105 ---
89 
The availability of a writing tool that can easily assist all undergraduate students in 
preparing their final thesis will significantly reduce the time required to write thesis. FCSIT 
will continuously make effort in improving the quality of the thesis produced by students. 
Students are highly encouraged to learn and use the thesis template provided in 
preparing their final thesis for evaluation or final submission to graduate. 
5.2.1 Functionality Test 
Functionality testing was conducted to evaluate whether the developed system 
performed its main operations correctly in accordance with the project requirements. The 
purpose of this testing was to verify that each core feature of the syste m could accept the 
intended input, process it correctly, and produce the expected output. Since the project 
focuses on user authentication, product registration, QR-based verification, clone-detection 
support, revocation handling, ledger recording, and das hboard analytics, the testing 
concentrated on these major functions.  
The functionality test cases were derived from the main use cases identified during 
the system analysis and design phase. Each test case was executed in a contr olled 
environment using the developed web application, backend server, and database. The 
observed system behaviour was then compared with the expected result in order to determine 
whether the implementation satisfied its intended purpose.

--- PAGE 106 ---
90 
Table 5.1  Functionality Test Cases 
Test ID Function Test Scenario Input Expected Result Actual Result Status 
TC01 User Login Login with valid 
credentials 
Valid username and 
password 
User is authenticated 
successfully and 
redirected to the 
dashboard 
Successful login and 
dashboard displayed 
Pass 
TC02 User Login Login with invalid 
credentials 
Invalid username or 
password 
System rejects login 
and displays an error 
message 
Incorrect login attempt was 
rejected with an error 
message 
Pass 
TC03 Access Control Attempt to access the 
dashboard without 
login 
Direct URL request System prevents 
unauthorized access 
and redirects user to 
the login page 
Unauthorized access was 
prevented 
Pass 
TC04 Product Registration Register a product  
with valid details 
Product name and 
serial number 
Product is 
successfully registered 
and a QR code is 
generated 
Product was registered 
successfully and QR code 
was generated 
Pass 
TC05 QR Verification Scan a valid QR code Valid QR payload Product is verif ied 
successfully and 
displayed as authentic 
Product was correctly 
displayed as authentic 
Pass 

--- PAGE 107 ---
91 
TC06 Invalid QR 
Detection 
Scan a tampered QR 
code 
Modified or invalid 
QR payload 
System rejects the QR 
code and displays an 
invalid result 
System correctly identified 
the QR code as invalid 
Pass 
TC07 Clone Detection 
(Normal Repeated 
Scan) 
Scan the same product 
repeatedly from the 
same location 
Multiple scans from 
the same location 
Product should not be 
marked as suspicious 
solely due to repeated 
scans from the same 
place 
System kept the product 
status as normal 
Pass 
TC08 Clone Detection 
(Location Anomaly) 
Scan the same product 
from different 
locations within an 
unrealistic timeframe 
Scans from different 
locations in a short 
time period 
System marks the scan 
as suspicious 
System correctly marked the 
scan as suspicious 
Pass 
TC09 Product Revocation Revoke an active 
product 
Product ID and 
revocation reason 
Product status is 
updated to revoked 
Product status was 
successfully updated to 
revoked 
Pass 
TC10 Revoked Product 
Scan 
Scan a revoked 
product QR code 
Revoked product QR 
code 
Warning or revoked 
result is displayed 
System correctly displayed 
the revoked warning 
Pass 
TC11 Ledger Recording Perform product 
registration or 
revocation 
System operation Relevant event is 
recorded in the 
tamper-evident ledger 
System correctly recorded 
the event in the ledger 
Pass 

--- PAGE 108 ---
92 
TC12 Dashboard Analytics Load analytics 
dashboard 
System request Correct statistics and 
scan information are 
displayed 
Dashboard displayed the 
correct st atistics and scan 
records 
Pass 
TC13 User Logout Logout from an 
authenticated session 
Logout action User session is ended 
and login page is 
displayed 
Logout completed 
successfully and login page 
was shown 
Pass 
 
Based on the test results, the major functional components of the system operated according to the intended requirements. The  
authentication module correctly handled valid login, invalid login, access restriction, and logout. The product registration and QR verification 
functions also worked correctly, while the clone-detection mechanism was able to identify abnormal location-based scan behaviour without 
incorrectly flagging repeated normal scans from the same place. In addition, revoked products were handl ed correctly during verification, 
ledger events were recorded successfully, and the analytics dashboard displayed the expected summary information. 

--- PAGE 109 ---
93 
5.2.2 Usability Testing 
Usability testing was conducted to evaluate the practicality, clarity, and ease of use 
of the developed web-based product authentication system. The system involves two main 
user groups, namely administrators or manufacturers who manage product records, and 
consumers who verify product authenticity through QR code scanning. The testing focused  
on whether the main system functions could be accessed and used easily by the intended 
users.  
The usability testing was carried out by observing user interaction with the system 
on both desktop and mobile devices. The main aspects evaluated included ease of navigation, 
clarity of information, simplicity of the workflow, responsiveness of the interfaces, and the 
overall user experience. As the system was developed as a prototype, the evaluation was 
qualitative and focused on practical usability rather than large-scale user survey results.  
From the administrator perspective, the system was evaluated based on its ability to 
support core tasks such as login, product registration, QR code generation, product listing, 
analytics viewing, and product revocation. The administrator interface was found to be 
straightforward and easy to understand. The dashboard provided clear navigation to the main 
functions, while the product registration process required only essential information such as 
product name and serial nu mber. After registration, the generated QR code was displayed 
clearly and could be downloaded for use.  
The product list, analytics, and revocation features also supported the administrator 
workflow effectively. Registered products could be viewed in an organized manner, and 
products could be revoked when necessary. The analytics page provided useful scan an d 
product status information, while the revocation history page allowed revoked products to 

--- PAGE 110 ---
94 
be reviewed. Overall, the administrator interface was considered suitable for managing the 
product authentication process.  
From the consumer perspective, the verif ication interface was evaluated based on 
how easily users could verify a product and understand the result. The consumer workflow 
was kept simple by allowing users to scan a QR code and view the verification outcome 
directly. The system displayed clear result statuses such as authentic, suspicious, invalid, or 
revoked, together with relevant product information. Warning and alert messages helped 
users understand the meaning of suspicious or revoked results without requiring technical 
knowledge.  
Mobile usability was also considered important because consumers are expected to 
scan QR codes using smartphones. The verification interface was tested on mobile devices 
to ensure that the layout remained readable and functional on smaller screens. The QR 
scanning an d verification process could be completed successfully when the device had 
internet access and camera permission. This indicates that the consumer interface is suitable 
for mobile-based product verification.  
In summary, the usability testing showed that the system is generally understandable, 
accessible, and convenient for its intended users. The administrator interface supports the 
main management operations in a clear and organized manner, while the consumer interface 
provides a simple QR -based verificat ion process. Overall, the system demonstrates 
acceptable usability for prototype evaluation and practical demonstration purposes.  

--- PAGE 111 ---
95 
5.3 Summary 
This chapter has presented the testing carried out for the developed system. The 
testing process was divided into functionality testing and usability testing in order to evaluate 
both system correctness and user interaction. Functionality testing showed that the major 
system components, including product registration, QR code generation, verification, clone 
detection, revocation, and logging, operated according to the intended workflow. Usability 
testing showed that the interface was generally understandable and suitable for both 
manufacturer-side management and consumer-side verification.  
Based on the testing results, the system can be considered successful as an advanced 
prototype developed within a controlled environment. The core objectives of the project 
were achieved, particularly in providing a product authentication workflow supported by QR 
verification, suspicious scan detection, revocation capability, and tamper-evident recording. 
However, the testing also indicates that the system remains a prototype and still has 
limitations related to heuristic clone detection, infrastructure dependency, and the absence 
of ful l decentralization. Despite these limitations, the system provides a strong proof of 
concept and a solid foundation for further enhancement. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 112 ---
96 
CHAPTER 6  
 
 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
6.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the overall conclusion of the project. It evaluates the extent to 
which the project objectives have been achieved, outlines the key contributions of the 
developed system, discusses the limitations encountered, and proposes directions for future 
enhancements. This chapter serves to assess the significance of the project and position the 
developed system as a foundation for further advancement in product authentication and 
anti-counterfeit solutions. 
6.2 Achievements of Objectives 
The objectives of this project have been suc cessfully achieved through the 
development of the proposed system. The completed prototype demonstrates the integration 
of QR-based product verification, clone detection, product revocation, and tamper -evident 
record keeping within a web-based environment.  
The first objective was to design a secure system for registering and verifying product 
information using unique QR codes. This objective was fulfilled through the implementation 
of a product registration module that enables manufacturers to register products and generate 
corresponding QR codes. The verification component allows consumers to scan QR codes 
and retrieve authenticity status along with relevant product details. Furthermore, the system 
enhances security by utilising a protected verification pa yload rather than exposing raw 
product information directly within the QR code.  

--- PAGE 113 ---
97 
The second objective was to implement clone -detection and product revocation 
mechanisms to manage counterfeit -related risks. This objective was achieved within the 
defined pro ject scope. The system monitors scan behaviour and identifies suspicious 
activities based on predefined detection logic. Although the mechanism does not provide 
definitive proof of counterfeiting, it functions effectively as a heuristic risk indicator. The  
revocation feature further strengthens risk management by allowing manufacturers to 
invalidate compromised or suspicious products, ensuring they are no longer considered valid 
during verification.  
The third objective was to develop a web-based prototype integrating QR generation, 
a blockchain-based tamper-evident ledger, and a verification interface. This objective was 
accomplished through the implementation of a complete system comprising manufacturer 
side management, consumer -side verification, scan log ging, and revocation handling. 
System events are recorded in an append -only ledger structure, reflecting key blockchain 
principles such as cryptographic hash chaining, immutability, and traceability. Although not 
fully decentralized, the system demonstrates the practical application of a blockchain-based 
approach within a controlled prototype environment.  
Overall, the project objectives have been successfully fulfilled, resulting in a 
functional end -to-end authentication system that satisfies the intended project aim and 
provides a strong proof of concept.  
6.3 Contribution 
This project contributes both practically and academically to the field of product 
authentication.  

--- PAGE 114 ---
98 
From a practical perspective, the system provides an integrated solution that 
combines pro duct registration, QR code generation, verification, clone detection, and 
revocation management within a unified platform. This demonstrates a complete 
authentication workflow rather than isolated feature implementation.  
The project also contributes by applying a blockchain-based approach in a practical 
context. The inclusion of a tamper -evident ledger enhances data integrity and traceability, 
demonstrating how core blockchain principles can be adapted without requiring fu ll 
decentralization.  
Another key contribution is the implementation of clone detection based on scan 
behaviour. By analysing scan patterns, the system introduces a behavioural security layer 
that extends beyond static QR validation, supporting more inform ed counterfeit risk 
assessment.  
Additionally, the revocation mechanism strengthens system reliability by ensuring 
that compromised products can be explicitly invalidated and excluded from future 
verification.  
From an academic standpoint, the project demonstrates the feasibility of integrating 
QR-based verification, behavioural detection, revocation handling, and tamper -evident 
recording into a cohesive system, providing a valuable reference for future research and 
development. 
6.4 Limitations 
Despite the succ essful implementation of the project, several limitations remain in 
the current system.  

--- PAGE 115 ---
99 
Firstly, although the system is described as blockchain -based, it is not fully 
decentralized. The implementation relies on a centralized backend and database, and 
therefore does not achieve full distributed trust, consensus, or independent verification found 
in real blockchain networks.  
The second limitation relates to the clone-detection mechanism. The suspicious scan 
detection logic is heuristic in nature and should be interpreted as a risk indicator rather than 
definitive proof of counterfeit activity. Abnormal scan patterns may suggest possible misuse, 
but they do not guarantee that a product is counterfeit. This means that revocation decisions 
still depend on manufacturer judgment rather than fully automated certainty.  
The system also remains at prototype level in terms of broader security and 
operational robustness. Areas such as full authentication and authorization, large -scale 
performance testing, automated tes ting coverage, and production -level security were not 
fully addressed within the scope of the project.  
6.5 Future Works 
Several improvements can be considered for future development of the system:  
 A real decentralized blockchain layer can be implemented by deploying smart 
contracts and migrating important product events such as registration and 
revocation onto a blockchain platform to enhance system immutability and 
transparency.  
 The clone-detection mechanism can be further improved by incorporating 
more adv anced anomaly detection techniques, including enhanced 

--- PAGE 116 ---
100 
behavioural analysis, improved location evaluation, and the use of machine 
learning to identify abnormal verification patterns.  
 User security and access control can be strengthened by introducing a proper 
authentication mechanism for manufacturers, implementing role -based 
authorization, and enhancing audit and access monitoring features.  
 The system can be improved through more comprehensive testing, including 
automated testing, performance evaluation,  and scalability analysis, to 
increase overall reliability and robustness.  
 The user experience can be enhanced by providing more detailed analytics, 
improved scan log filtering, exportable reports, better mobile interface 
design, and more convenient remote deployment options.  
 The system can be extended to support full supply chain traceability by 
enabling tracking of product movement, ownership transitions, and lifecycle 
events across multiple stakeholders. 
6.6 Conclusion 
In conclusion, this project successfu lly developed a blockchain -based product 
authentication system incorporating clone -detection and revocation features. The system 
demonstrates that QR -based verification, behavioural analysis, and tamper -evident 
recording can be effectively integrated into a practical authentication workflow.  
Although the system is not fully decentralized or production -ready, it provides a 
meaningful contribution by illustrating how blockchain -based principles and behavioural 

--- PAGE 117 ---
101 
detection can enhance product authentication sys tems. The identified limitations highlight 
opportunities for improvement, while the proposed future work outlines clear directions for 
further development.  
Overall, the system demonstrates the practical potential of combining blockchain -
based principles with behavioural verification to enhance trust, security, and transparency in 
modern product authentication systems.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PAGE 118 ---
102 
REFERENCES 
 Kulkarni, D.P., Manwar, T. V., Naykawadi, F. J., & Patil, P. M. (2025). Fake product 
identification using blockchain. In Journal Publication of International Research for 
Engineering and Management. JOIREM. https://joirem.com/wp 
content/uploads/journal/published_paper/volume-05/issue-4/J_KBDOl5Km.pdf. 
Mallegowda, M., Kanavalli, A., Thippeswamy, M. N., Gupta, K., Khandelwal, L., Bhattad, 
V., & Vaswani, H. (2022). Fake product identification system using blockchain. 
IEEE Conference Publication. https://doi.org/10.1109/i4c57141.2022.10057923 
Nagar, R., Chaturvedi, N., & Prabakaran , J. (2023). Product authentication system using 
blockchain. IEEE Conference  Publication 
https://doi.org/10.1109/icnwc57852.2023.10127447 Publication. 
Rajkumar. (2016, April 5). Waterfall Model in Software Development Life Cycle. Software 
Testing Material.  https://www.softwaretestingmaterial.com/waterfall-model-in-
sdlc/#google_vignette 
Shankar, B. P., & Jayavadivel, R. (2019, December 12). A survey of counterfeit product 
detection. International Journal of Scientific & Technology Research, 8(12), 2958 -
2962. https://www.ijstr.org/final-print/dec2019/A-Survey-Of-Counterfeit-Product-
Detection.pdf 
Tiwari, K., Patil, N., Gupta, A., Sabale, A., & Lomte, V. (2023, May). Fake product detection 
using blockchain technology. In International Research Journal of Modernization in 
Engineering Technology and Science (pp. 2582 –5208). 
https://www.irjmets.com/uploadedfiles/paper/issue_5_may_2023/41058/final/fin_ir
jmets 1685631927.pdf 

--- PAGE 119 ---
103 
Wasnik, K., Sondawle, I., Wani, R., & Pulgam, N. (2022). Detection of counterfeit products 
using blockchain. ITM Web  of Conferences, 44, 03015.  
https://doi.org/10.1051/itmconf/20224403015 of Conferences, 44, 03015 
 
 
 